## Latvia (2010-08-01)

The economy shrank dramatically in 2009, with real GDP falling by 18%. It is now stabilising, although it contracted by 6% year on year in the first quarter of 2010. Industrial production is recovering, driven by external demand, but consumer demand remains weak. Domestic demand in 2010 will be squeezed by higher unemployment, falling real and nominal wages, and pressure on firms' and households' balance sheets from their high level of debt. Private consumption and investment will therefore fall again in 2010. Competitiveness problems will continue to affect exports, but the improvement in the external environment will allow exports to grow modestly in 2010-11. We forecast that real GDP will decline by a 2.3% in 2010. Year-on-year growth is likely to resume in mid-2010, and we forecast that the economy will grow by around 3% in 2011. The main internal risk for the economy is that domestic demand could prove weaker than expected, causing GDP to fall further. There is also a risk to foreign sales if Latvia's export markets were to recover more slowly than we currently expect, although the reasonably robust rebound in a number of regional economies forecast for 2010 also poses some upside risk.Policy over the forecast period will be determined by the IMF programme agreed in December 2008 to stabilise the economy. The programme, subsequently extended to three years, is backed by around US$10.5bn in loans, including US$2.4bn from the Fund. The rest is being provided mainly by the EU and Scandinavian countries, although the government now hopes that the funds due to be provided by Scandinavian countries will not be needed. The programme is built around maintaining Latvia's exchange-rate peg. To this end, stringent adjustment measures are being undertaken, including wide-ranging expenditure cuts. Support has been provided for the banking sector. The government has also promised structural reforms-notably, to education and healthcare. Pressure on the public finances may prompt some privatisations.Protecting the currency peg will remain the primary concern of the Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank). However, the BoL will also seek to encourage a revival of lending activity to assist economic recovery. In March the BoL cut its main policy rate, the refinancing rate, from 4% to 3.5%, following two cuts, each of 100 basis points, in March and May 2009. Then, in July, the BoL cut its deposit facility rates. However, these rates have little economic significance and lending rates are largely dictated by the decisions of the foreign parents of the country's main banks. The BoL has regularly had to intervene to support the lat since February 2009, after concerns about Latvia's ability to maintain its exchange-rate peg prompted renewed pressure on the currency. Uncertainties about the level of political commitment to the conditions of the IMF-led programme are likely to force the BoL to intervene again in the future.The president, Valdis Zatlers, has adopted a more assertive stance towards the Saeima (parliament). He used his annual mid-year address to parliament in June to criticise the legislature for its low public standing and its unwillingness to pass substantive anti-corruption legislation. He called for expanded executive powers that would grant his office the right to dismiss parliament under a simplified procedure. Any current attempt to dissolve parliament requires a "zero-sum game" referendum. If the public vote supports dissolution, then a new election is organised. If it supports the existing parliament, then the president must step down. The president also asked for the power to appoint the auditor-general, the ombudsman, and the president of the Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank). He expressed support for a citizens' initiative calling for constitutional reforms that would lead to a popularly elected presidency. This proposal has been a recurring one since independence, in part because of the frequent unpopularity of the legislature, as is the case currently. It is typically supported by opposition parties looking for a populist message. However, the change would have important implications for the institutional balance of powers in Latvia, and arguably needs to be approached with greater caution.A few days later Mr Zatlers backed up his battling rhetoric by returning three bills to parliament for a second reading. The first was an insolvency law described as being too biased against lenders in easing the bankruptcy process for individuals and enterprises (see Economic policy). The second was an electronic mass media law that aimed to restrict the use of foreign language programming by Latvian broadcasters. The third, made up of amendments to the law on the prevention of conflict of interest in the activities of public officials, would have redefined the board members of political parties as public officials and required them to submit annual financial declarations. This is arguably excessive, given that political parties are not part of the state and that many of their board members are not active in public life.With the next review mission from the IMF and the European Commission not due until after the parliamentary election in October 2010, and the publication of the draft 2011 budget also delayed until the new parliament has been elected, the main elements of economic policy are in effect on hold until October. However, not all controversial issues have been shelved. In particular, moves to liberalise the law on insolvency led to political dispute, with the president, Valdis Zatlers, sending back the government's proposals to the Saeima (parliament) for further consideration in June. Under the government's proposals, it would become easier for borrowers, whether private individuals or companies, who were unable to service their debts to declare themselves insolvent. Banks criticised the measure, which they argue will make it more difficult for them to secure repayment of loans, and so discourage them from extending new credit. The proposals also contained a requirement for those applying for new mortgages from the banks to put down 50% of the property's value as a deposit. This requirement, if implemented, would severely constrain lending in the mortgage market. The government proposals appear intended to show that the authorities are sensitive to the needs of the significant proportion of the population that took on large property loans during the economic boom and was then left exposed when property prices collapsed in 2008 and 2009. However, it is not clear that the government is completely united behind the proposed changes-Teodors Tverijons, the head of the Association of Latvian Commercial Banks, has argued that the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economy support the banks' criticisms of the proposed changes. 
Economic performance: Bank borrowing is still shrinking
One area that is proving slow to stabilise is bank borrowing. The stock of borrowing continues to fall: total bank credit was down by 7.6% year on year in June. There are signs that in month-on-month terms, borrowing may be stabilising. Nevertheless, the BoL appears worried that commercial banks are reluctant to extend new loans, preferring to deposit excess funds with the central bank. In an effort to encourage the banks to lend more, the BoL announced in mid-July that it was cutting the rate that it pays the banks for their deposits, while leaving its main policy rate unchanged.Although problem loans continue to rise, the rate of increase so far in 2010 has been much lower than in 2009, and banks' financial performance is gradually improving. With similar trends apparent in Estonia and Lithuania, the two largest foreign banks in the Baltics, Swedbank and SEB (both from Sweden), announced in July that they returned to profit in the second quarter, as loan losses on their Baltic operations proved significantly lower than expected. This provides further evidence that the Baltic economies are stabilising, but it is much less clear that there will be either the demand for new credit from businesses or the supply of new loans from the banks to finance the rise in investment needed to drive a healthy economic recovery.Central bank governorWith the next review mission from the IMF and the European Commission not due until after the parliamentary election in October 2010, and the publication of the draft 2011 budget also delayed until the new parliament has been elected, the main elements of economic policy are in effect on hold until October. However, not all controversial issues have been shelved. In particular, moves to liberalise the law on insolvency led to political dispute, with the president, Valdis Zatlers, sending back the government's proposals to the Saeima (parliament) for further consideration in June. Under the government's proposals, it would become easier for borrowers, whether private individuals or companies, who were unable to service their debts to declare themselves insolvent. Banks criticised the measure, which they argue will make it more difficult for them to secure repayment of loans, and so discourage them from extending new credit. The proposals also contained a requirement for those applying for new mortgages from the banks to put down 50% of the property's value as a deposit. This requirement, if implemented, would severely constrain lending in the mortgage market. One area that is proving slow to stabilise is bank borrowing. The stock of borrowing continues to fall: total bank credit was down by 7.6% year on year in June. There are signs that in month-on-month terms, borrowing may be stabilising. Nevertheless, the BoL appears worried that commercial banks are reluctant to extend new loans, preferring to deposit excess funds with the central bank. In an effort to encourage the banks to lend more, the BoL announced in mid-July that it was cutting the rate that it pays the banks for their deposits, while leaving its main policy rate unchanged.Although problem loans continue to rise, the rate of increase so far in 2010 has been much lower than in 2009, and banks' financial performance is gradually improving. With similar trends apparent in Estonia and Lithuania, the two largest foreign banks in the Baltics, Swedbank and SEB (both from Sweden), announced in July that they returned to profit in the second quarter, as loan losses on their Baltic operations proved significantly lower than expected. This provides further evidence that the Baltic economies are stabilising, but it is much less clear that there will be either the demand for new credit from businesses or the supply of new loans from the banks to finance the rise in investment needed to drive a healthy economic recovery.We forecast that global GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) will rise by around 4.2% in 2010 before growth softens to 3.6% in 2011. The outlook for the euro zone, Latvia's largest export market, is much weaker: real GDP in the euro zone contracted by 4% in 2009 and is forecast to grow by just 0.7% in 2010 and by 0.8% in 2011. Estonia, Lithuania, the UK and Sweden, which are significant destinations for Latvian exports, will only recover slowly in 2010-11, although Russia will post robust growth. We forecast that demand in Latvia's 20 largest export markets will rise by 4.5% in 2010 and by 4.2% in 2011. The euro is forecast to depreciate against the US dollar on average in 2010 and in 2011 as a result of concerns about debt default and a break-up of the euro area. We expect oil prices to rise from an average of US$62/barrel for dated Brent Blend crude in 2009 to an average of around US$79/b in 2010-11 as global demand recovers. The rise in oil prices and the weakening of the euro will limit the fall in the domestic price level in Latvia.Latvia will broadly comply with the aspects of its IMF programme needed to ward off a financial crisis, but progress on structural reforms will prove difficult because of popular discontent over the economic recession and fiscal cuts. The 2010 budget met most of the IMF's requirements, and the IMF and EU in July approved the release of the next tranches of their financing. Despite the likelihood of further clashes between populist parties and Latvia's foreign lenders, the country's continuing reliance on foreign support leaves the minority government and opposition parties, as well as the next government, little option but to maintain an accommodation with the IMF and the EU. Large fiscal deficits are now the main obstacle to Latvia's goal of meeting the Maastricht criteria for euro zone entry. The government has said that it will bring down the budget deficit to 3% of GDP in 2012 to allow euro zone entry in 2014. However, the fiscal adjustment required in 2010-12 to achieve this target appears too challenging, and the Economist Intelligence Unit does not expect Latvia to enter the euro zone until 2015 at the earliest, with a considerable chance of further delay.A few days later Mr Zatlers backed up his battling rhetoric by returning three bills to parliament for a second reading. The first was an insolvency law described as being too biased against lenders in easing the bankruptcy process for individuals and enterprises (see Economic policy). The second was an electronic mass media law that aimed to restrict the use of foreign language programming by Latvian broadcasters. The third, made up of amendments to the law on the prevention of conflict of interest in the activities of public officials, would have redefined the board members of political parties as public officials and required them to submit annual financial declarations. This is arguably excessive, given that political parties are not part of the state and that many of their board members are not active in public life.As expected after the preliminary agreements reached in June (July 2010, Economic policy), the IMF board and the European Commission approved in mid-July the release of the next tranches of external support for Latvia, of EUR106m (US$133m) and EUR200m, respectively, to be paid in mid-September. Olli Rehn, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs, praised Latvia's progress in stabilising its public finances, but said that further measures would be needed to bring down the budget deficit to 6% of GDP in 2011.After protracted discussions, the parliamentary committee dealing with the insolvency law approved a new draft on July 19th, and parliament passed the new law on July 26th, overriding Mr Zatlers's veto. The legislation will come into force on November 1st. It includes some changes to the previous version-notably, making the schedule for write-offs dependent on income. However, it has still been criticised for making insufficient distinctions between households who ran into financial problems in servicing loans taken out on their own houses or flats, and speculators who took out much larger loans.Although problem loans continue to rise, the rate of increase so far in 2010 has been much lower than in 2009, and banks' financial performance is gradually improving. With similar trends apparent in Estonia and Lithuania, the two largest foreign banks in the Baltics, Swedbank and SEB (both from Sweden), announced in July that they returned to profit in the second quarter, as loan losses on their Baltic operations proved significantly lower than expected. This provides further evidence that the Baltic economies are stabilising, but it is much less clear that there will be either the demand for new credit from businesses or the supply of new loans from the banks to finance the rise in investment needed to drive a healthy economic recovery.Latvia's balance of payments continues to be characterised by a large current-account surplus, offset by an outflow on the capital and financial account as foreign borrowing is reduced. However, in contrast to early 2009, the current-account surplus is now comfortably higher than the outflow on the financial account, allowing the BoL to increase its foreign reserves significantly in January-May 2010.On the financing side of the balance of payments, the main inflow continues to come from government transactions, reflecting loans to Latvia by international financial organisations. The outflow on other loans continued in early 2010, although at a lower level than in the first five months of 2009, and there was a net outflow of foreign direct investment (FDI), largely reflecting investors' losses.Latvia will broadly comply with the aspects of its IMF programme needed to ward off a financial crisis, but progress on structural reforms will prove difficult because of popular discontent over the economic recession and fiscal cuts. The 2010 budget met most of the IMF's requirements, and the IMF and EU in July approved the release of the next tranches of their financing. Despite the likelihood of further clashes between populist parties and Latvia's foreign lenders, the country's continuing reliance on foreign support leaves the minority government and opposition parties, as well as the next government, little option but to maintain an accommodation with the IMF and the EU. Large fiscal deficits are now the main obstacle to Latvia's goal of meeting the Maastricht criteria for euro zone entry. The government has said that it will bring down the budget deficit to 3% of GDP in 2012 to allow euro zone entry in 2014. However, the fiscal adjustment required in 2010-12 to achieve this target appears too challenging, and the Economist Intelligence Unit does not expect Latvia to enter the euro zone until 2015 at the earliest, with a considerable chance of further delay.Protecting the currency peg will remain the primary concern of the Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank). However, the BoL will also seek to encourage a revival of lending activity to assist economic recovery. In March the BoL cut its main policy rate, the refinancing rate, from 4% to 3.5%, following two cuts, each of 100 basis points, in March and May 2009. Then, in July, the BoL cut its deposit facility rates. However, these rates have little economic significance and lending rates are largely dictated by the decisions of the foreign parents of the country's main banks. The BoL has regularly had to intervene to support the lat since February 2009, after concerns about Latvia's ability to maintain its exchange-rate peg prompted renewed pressure on the currency. Uncertainties about the level of political commitment to the conditions of the IMF-led programme are likely to force the BoL to intervene again in the future.We forecast that global GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) will rise by around 4.2% in 2010 before growth softens to 3.6% in 2011. The outlook for the euro zone, Latvia's largest export market, is much weaker: real GDP in the euro zone contracted by 4% in 2009 and is forecast to grow by just 0.7% in 2010 and by 0.8% in 2011. Estonia, Lithuania, the UK and Sweden, which are significant destinations for Latvian exports, will only recover slowly in 2010-11, although Russia will post robust growth. We forecast that demand in Latvia's 20 largest export markets will rise by 4.5% in 2010 and by 4.2% in 2011. The euro is forecast to depreciate against the US dollar on average in 2010 and in 2011 as a result of concerns about debt default and a break-up of the euro area. We expect oil prices to rise from an average of US$62/barrel for dated Brent Blend crude in 2009 to an average of around US$79/b in 2010-11 as global demand recovers. The rise in oil prices and the weakening of the euro will limit the fall in the domestic price level in Latvia.A few days later Mr Zatlers backed up his battling rhetoric by returning three bills to parliament for a second reading. The first was an insolvency law described as being too biased against lenders in easing the bankruptcy process for individuals and enterprises (see Economic policy). The second was an electronic mass media law that aimed to restrict the use of foreign language programming by Latvian broadcasters. The third, made up of amendments to the law on the prevention of conflict of interest in the activities of public officials, would have redefined the board members of political parties as public officials and required them to submit annual financial declarations. This is arguably excessive, given that political parties are not part of the state and that many of their board members are not active in public life.Following the decisions to release the funds, the Latvian government published the supplementary Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) agreed with the IMF and the EU. This sets out the additional measures that it plans to implement in order to meet the lenders' conditions. The main element is the renewed commitment to bringing the budget deficit down to 6% of GDP in 2011 and to 3% of GDP in 2012. The government has also committed itself to reforming the pension and social benefits systems (with the changes to be implemented in 2011 and "after 2012", respectively), as well as to submit to parliament a "fiscal responsibility law" (June 2010, Economic policy) by September 2010. How much the government that takes office after the October parliamentary election will be bound by these commitments remains to be seen.Local governments in Latvia have little scope to borrow (they ran a surplus of LVL51m in January-June), so the general government budget deficit tends to mirror the central government's budget shortfall. According to the Ministry of Finance, the general government deficit in January-June was LVL174m, down sharply from LVL425m a year earlier. Although spending tends to rise at the end of the year, the stabilising economy should also help to boost revenue, and the budget deficit looks on track to meet the targets agreed with international lenders.With the next review mission from the IMF and the European Commission not due until after the parliamentary election in October 2010, and the publication of the draft 2011 budget also delayed until the new parliament has been elected, the main elements of economic policy are in effect on hold until October. However, not all controversial issues have been shelved. In particular, moves to liberalise the law on insolvency led to political dispute, with the president, Valdis Zatlers, sending back the government's proposals to the Saeima (parliament) for further consideration in June. Under the government's proposals, it would become easier for borrowers, whether private individuals or companies, who were unable to service their debts to declare themselves insolvent. Banks criticised the measure, which they argue will make it more difficult for them to secure repayment of loans, and so discourage them from extending new credit. The proposals also contained a requirement for those applying for new mortgages from the banks to put down 50% of the property's value as a deposit. This requirement, if implemented, would severely constrain lending in the mortgage market. One area that is proving slow to stabilise is bank borrowing. The stock of borrowing continues to fall: total bank credit was down by 7.6% year on year in June. There are signs that in month-on-month terms, borrowing may be stabilising. Nevertheless, the BoL appears worried that commercial banks are reluctant to extend new loans, preferring to deposit excess funds with the central bank. In an effort to encourage the banks to lend more, the BoL announced in mid-July that it was cutting the rate that it pays the banks for their deposits, while leaving its main policy rate unchanged.Calendar yearPolicy over the forecast period will be determined by the IMF programme agreed in December 2008 to stabilise the economy. The programme, subsequently extended to three years, is backed by around US$10.5bn in loans, including US$2.4bn from the Fund. The rest is being provided mainly by the EU and Scandinavian countries, although the government now hopes that the funds due to be provided by Scandinavian countries will not be needed. The programme is built around maintaining Latvia's exchange-rate peg. To this end, stringent adjustment measures are being undertaken, including wide-ranging expenditure cuts. Support has been provided for the banking sector. The government has also promised structural reforms-notably, to education and healthcare. Pressure on the public finances may prompt some privatisations.
Economic policy: IMF and the EU confirm the release of next loan tranches
With the next review mission from the IMF and the European Commission not due until after the parliamentary election in October 2010, and the publication of the draft 2011 budget also delayed until the new parliament has been elected, the main elements of economic policy are in effect on hold until October. However, not all controversial issues have been shelved. In particular, moves to liberalise the law on insolvency led to political dispute, with the president, Valdis Zatlers, sending back the government's proposals to the Saeima (parliament) for further consideration in June. Under the government's proposals, it would become easier for borrowers, whether private individuals or companies, who were unable to service their debts to declare themselves insolvent. Banks criticised the measure, which they argue will make it more difficult for them to secure repayment of loans, and so discourage them from extending new credit. The proposals also contained a requirement for those applying for new mortgages from the banks to put down 50% of the property's value as a deposit. This requirement, if implemented, would severely constrain lending in the mortgage market. The government proposals appear intended to show that the authorities are sensitive to the needs of the significant proportion of the population that took on large property loans during the economic boom and was then left exposed when property prices collapsed in 2008 and 2009. However, it is not clear that the government is completely united behind the proposed changes-Teodors Tverijons, the head of the Association of Latvian Commercial Banks, has argued that the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economy support the banks' criticisms of the proposed changes. After protracted discussions, the parliamentary committee dealing with the insolvency law approved a new draft on July 19th, and parliament passed the new law on July 26th, overriding Mr Zatlers's veto. The legislation will come into force on November 1st. It includes some changes to the previous version-notably, making the schedule for write-offs dependent on income. However, it has still been criticised for making insufficient distinctions between households who ran into financial problems in servicing loans taken out on their own houses or flats, and speculators who took out much larger loans.One area that is proving slow to stabilise is bank borrowing. The stock of borrowing continues to fall: total bank credit was down by 7.6% year on year in June. There are signs that in month-on-month terms, borrowing may be stabilising. Nevertheless, the BoL appears worried that commercial banks are reluctant to extend new loans, preferring to deposit excess funds with the central bank. In an effort to encourage the banks to lend more, the BoL announced in mid-July that it was cutting the rate that it pays the banks for their deposits, while leaving its main policy rate unchanged.Although problem loans continue to rise, the rate of increase so far in 2010 has been much lower than in 2009, and banks' financial performance is gradually improving. With similar trends apparent in Estonia and Lithuania, the two largest foreign banks in the Baltics, Swedbank and SEB (both from Sweden), announced in July that they returned to profit in the second quarter, as loan losses on their Baltic operations proved significantly lower than expected. This provides further evidence that the Baltic economies are stabilising, but it is much less clear that there will be either the demand for new credit from businesses or the supply of new loans from the banks to finance the rise in investment needed to drive a healthy economic recovery.On the financing side of the balance of payments, the main inflow continues to come from government transactions, reflecting loans to Latvia by international financial organisations. The outflow on other loans continued in early 2010, although at a lower level than in the first five months of 2009, and there was a net outflow of foreign direct investment (FDI), largely reflecting investors' losses.The economy shrank dramatically in 2009, with real GDP falling by 18%. It is now stabilising, although it contracted by 6% year on year in the first quarter of 2010. Industrial production is recovering, driven by external demand, but consumer demand remains weak. Domestic demand in 2010 will be squeezed by higher unemployment, falling real and nominal wages, and pressure on firms' and households' balance sheets from their high level of debt. Private consumption and investment will therefore fall again in 2010. Competitiveness problems will continue to affect exports, but the improvement in the external environment will allow exports to grow modestly in 2010-11. We forecast that real GDP will decline by a 2.3% in 2010. Year-on-year growth is likely to resume in mid-2010, and we forecast that the economy will grow by around 3% in 2011. The main internal risk for the economy is that domestic demand could prove weaker than expected, causing GDP to fall further. There is also a risk to foreign sales if Latvia's export markets were to recover more slowly than we currently expect, although the reasonably robust rebound in a number of regional economies forecast for 2010 also poses some upside risk.
