## Brazil (2009-04-01)

The downturn in the world economy is set to be the sharpest since the second world war and, despite some easing of the decline in industrial production and trade volumes in some markets in recent weeks, the weakness remains acute in the emerging world. We expect the global economy to contract in 2009 for the first time in decades, both at market exchange rates and at purchasing power parity (PPP), by 2.6% and 1.5%, respectively. Although we expect a recovery to begin in late 2009, the pick-up will be fragile and growth will remain subdued in 2011-13. Brazil's terms of trade will weaken significantly and Brazilian banks, along with major corporate borrowers, will find it increasingly difficult to roll over credit lines as lenders around the world rebuild their balance sheets. However, Brazil's economy is in a position to absorb a significant drop in external capital inflows without this resulting in a balance of payments crisis. To Brazil's potential advantage, one of the few upside risks to our global forecast relates to the possibility that the Chinese government's massive stimulus package could be successful in promoting a more rapid rebound of Chinese demand than our central forecast envisages.Of the total extra R8.5bn provisions made by private domestic banks in February 2009, R3.2bn was directed to the best quality credit levels. These were probably the first balance sheet effects of the credit derivative losses incurred by companies in the fourth quarter of 2008. Possible further increases in provisions could jeopardize banks' profitability and trigger much tighter credit policies in incoming months. The solid financial position of the Brazilian government and state banks will support countercyclical measures that will mitigate the impact of the global recession. Much weaker fiscal revenue is not expected to have a significant impact on the implementation of the PAC, but there is a risk that it may affect other investment plans, despite a recent reduction in the primary surplus fiscal target. Together, the private sector and Petr&oacute;leo Brasileiro (Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company) account for the bulk of the PAC's programmed investments, and funding for the projects should be made available by the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econ&ocirc;mico e Social (BNDES, the national development bank). With interest rates and bank reserve requirements still extremely high by international standards, there is scope for further monetary easing. If necessary, the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) will extend up to US$36bn in short-term credit lines to companies with foreign loans falling due this year (reserves stood at just over US$200bn in mid-April), although so far eligible firms (typically Brazil's largest) have been able to secure finance at more favourable terms in the voluntary sector. In addition, Brazil is one of the few emerging markets to benefit from special swap facilities in US dollars established by the US Federal Reserve (the Fed, the US central bank) and due to remain in place through end-October. With the major banks well capitalised and restricting lending to the private sector, the sovereign will have little difficulty rolling over the R375bn (US$160bn) in domestic public debt falling due in the next 12 months. Furthermore, the Brazilian sovereign will be well-placed to take advantage of windows of opportunity in the international capital markets to issue foreign bonds at favourable terms.A sharp contraction in domestic demand in 2009 will exert a disinflationary impact, and as a result we anticipate 475 basis points of easing in the first half of this year, taking the benchmark overnight Selic rate to 9% (in its latest March meeting the Central Bank cut the Selic by 150 basis points to 11.25%). This will be the first time since the inflation-targeting regime was adopted in 1999 that nominal interest rates will be in single digits. The Selic could be raised again in 2010 if domestic demand picks up at a stronger pace than we forecast, fuelling renewed inflationary pressures, but at present we expect it to remain on hold. A slow improvement in liquidity conditions and increased government pressure on public banks to reduce commercial lending rates (which will force private institutions to follow through) will reduce the cost of borrowing, although overall it is set to remain very high. With the Central Bank concerned to re-anchor low inflationary expectations following the re-emergence of price pressures in 2008, rates are unlikely to converge more closely towards international levels in 2009-10. The BCB's inflation target remains at 4.5% (plus or minus 2 percentage points) for 2008-09.The downturn in the world economy is set to be the sharpest since the second world war and, despite some easing of the decline in industrial production and trade volumes in some markets in recent weeks, the weakness remains acute in the emerging world. We expect the global economy to contract in 2009 for the first time in decades, both at market exchange rates and at purchasing power parity (PPP), by 2.6% and 1.5%, respectively. Although we expect a recovery to begin in late 2009, the pick-up will be fragile and growth will remain subdued in 2011-13. Brazil's terms of trade will weaken significantly and Brazilian banks, along with major corporate borrowers, will find it increasingly difficult to roll over credit lines as lenders around the world rebuild their balance sheets. However, Brazil's economy is in a position to absorb a significant drop in external capital inflows without this resulting in a balance of payments crisis. To Brazil's potential advantage, one of the few upside risks to our global forecast relates to the possibility that the Chinese government's massive stimulus package could be successful in promoting a more rapid rebound of Chinese demand than our central forecast envisages.Although robust Chinese demand for Brazil's main export commodities (such as iron ore and soya) has helped to cushion the decline in export earnings, the contraction in the import bill on the back of a sharp cut in investment and currency depreciation has been significant. Export earnings have contracted by 19.4% year on year in January-March, while imports declined by 21.6%. Although we expect some deterioration in Brazil's terms of trade in the remainder of 2009 as a result of a correction in commodities' prices, we still expect a trade surplus of US$17.1bn. We now also expect a more marked narrowing of the income deficit owing to a sharp reduction in profit remittances, which will be only partly offset by a decline in investment income. Falling import spending and freight costs will help to narrow the services deficit, following a marked deterioration in 2008. Consequently we now project a narrower current-account deficit of 1.2% of GDP in 2009 (previously 2% of GDP). As terms of trade deteriorate further in 2010 and profit remittances recover slightly, the current-account deficit is projected to widen to 1.4% of GDP (previously our forecast was 2.1% of GDP). Although we expect the currency to depreciate further in the remainder of 2009 the run-down on reserves will be relatively modest, assuming that the Central Bank continues to intervene mostly via the derivative markets (currency swaps). As a result, reserves will remain almost double Brazil's gross external financing requirement. In the G20 meeting that took place in London in April, the consolidation of this wider group, which includes several large emerging countries, as an important deliberative forum was in itself a major victory for Brazil. The G20 decided to establish deadlines for the conclusion of the World Bank reform (which is likely to increase the representation of emerging countries) as well as for the revision of the IMF's quotas and also its representation scheme-of April 2010 and January 2011. These were two goals long defended by Brazil. Furthermore, the country's position as an important global economic player was reinforced by the fact that Brazil will actively participate in the plan to help the global economy to recover from the current recession (which envisages injecting US$1.1trn into multilateral institutions, mostly the IMF, which will be directed to lending to the most troubled countries). According to Brazil's minister of finance, Guido Mantega, the country is likely to lend at least US$4.5bn to the Fund (which is the equivalent of its quota with the IMF). The government's proposal for the remaining 600,000 is to grant 30-year funding coupled with several subsidies (such as lower loan insurance costs, much lower interest rates and reduced transaction costs), and for households with income between three and six minimum wages, an upfront subsidy of up to 20% of the unit cost. Units will be more or less standardised, and contracts will be settled by Caixa Econ&ocirc;mica Federal (CEF, one of Brazil's giant public banks). The programme will be confined to new homes and participants' credit quality must comply with ordinary standards used by CEF. 
Economic policy: Interventionism in the banking sector increases
Other decisions recently announced by the government indicate its concern that besides monetary and fiscal easing, some urgent improvement in private credit markets is needed to reduce the impact of the global crisis on the domestic economy. Despite the recent expansionary credit policies by public banks, if private institutions do not resume minimum levels of new credit origination at lower costs, there will be limited scope for a solid economic recovery this year (see Economic performance). As a result, the Lula government has indicated that it might adopt a more interventionist stance in the banking industry, in an attempt to foster greater competition. In early April the Lula government surprised the financial sector when it announced the replacement of the chief executive officer of Banco do Brasil (BB, Brazil's largest public bank). Antonio Francisco de Lima Neto was replaced by Aldemir Bendine, who is considered to be closer to Mr Mantega. Mr Lima Neto achieved significant success in raising the profitability of the BB to levels comparable to those of major private banks, thanks to cost controlling measures and much stricter credit risk policies. However, the appointment of Mr Bendine is not necessarily a return to traditional practices of politically oriented credit concessions, given his reputation as a respected executive with a lasting career at BB and a deep knowledge of the Brazilian retail banking industry. The government seems to expect that Mr Bendine will be more aggressive in the adoption of measures to promote competition in the sector, in particular, granting credit at costs more aligned to actual risks involved. The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.Besides the tax benefit, increased funding provided by the BB to banks associated with vehicle producers at end-2008 is also believed to be contributing to the sector's recent improved performance. Nonetheless, the availability of credit for the purchase of used vehicles purchases remains relatively depressed, and, given surging delinquency rates, this picture is not expected to improve significantly in the short term. Although the collapse of used vehicles' prices may encourage stronger demand, the market remains credit-dependent. This might weigh negatively on sales of new vehicles in the second quarter given their dependence on the trading in of used vehicles. February credit data compiled by the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) reinforced the perception that economic recovery in Brazil will be to a great extent dependent on private banks resuming more vigorous lending, which so far has remained depressed. Total outstanding credit grew by only 0.3% year on year to R1.23trn (US$5.47trn), remaining stable in relation to January 2008. Outstanding credit held by private-controlled banks dropped for a second consecutive month to R$774bn (US$344bn), which compared with R780bn in January and R782bn in December. Although this contraction was more than offset by the continued solid expansion of credit held by public banks, which increased by R7bn between January and February to R456.6bn, such a dynamic is unlikely to be sustained for much longer. Of the total extra R8.5bn provisions made by private domestic banks in February 2009, R3.2bn was directed to the best quality credit levels. These were probably the first balance sheet effects of the credit derivative losses incurred by companies in the fourth quarter of 2008. Possible further increases in provisions could jeopardize banks' profitability and trigger much tighter credit policies in incoming months. Central Bank governorWith interest rates and bank reserve requirements still extremely high by international standards, there is scope for further monetary easing. If necessary, the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) will extend up to US$36bn in short-term credit lines to companies with foreign loans falling due this year (reserves stood at just over US$200bn in mid-April), although so far eligible firms (typically Brazil's largest) have been able to secure finance at more favourable terms in the voluntary sector. In addition, Brazil is one of the few emerging markets to benefit from special swap facilities in US dollars established by the US Federal Reserve (the Fed, the US central bank) and due to remain in place through end-October. With the major banks well capitalised and restricting lending to the private sector, the sovereign will have little difficulty rolling over the R375bn (US$160bn) in domestic public debt falling due in the next 12 months. Furthermore, the Brazilian sovereign will be well-placed to take advantage of windows of opportunity in the international capital markets to issue foreign bonds at favourable terms.The downturn in the world economy is set to be the sharpest since the second world war and, despite some easing of the decline in industrial production and trade volumes in some markets in recent weeks, the weakness remains acute in the emerging world. We expect the global economy to contract in 2009 for the first time in decades, both at market exchange rates and at purchasing power parity (PPP), by 2.6% and 1.5%, respectively. Although we expect a recovery to begin in late 2009, the pick-up will be fragile and growth will remain subdued in 2011-13. Brazil's terms of trade will weaken significantly and Brazilian banks, along with major corporate borrowers, will find it increasingly difficult to roll over credit lines as lenders around the world rebuild their balance sheets. However, Brazil's economy is in a position to absorb a significant drop in external capital inflows without this resulting in a balance of payments crisis. To Brazil's potential advantage, one of the few upside risks to our global forecast relates to the possibility that the Chinese government's massive stimulus package could be successful in promoting a more rapid rebound of Chinese demand than our central forecast envisages.We expect real GDP to contract by 1.5% in 2009 and to grow by only 2.7% in 2010. Continuing weak industrial production data reflect extremely tight credit conditions, which will depress investment and employment. As a result, we expect gross fixed investment to contract markedly, by 11.2%, in 2009. Private consumption is also forecast to contract, by 0.9%. Despite a relatively strong retail sales performance in January (on the back of retailers' discounts, declining food prices and a recovery in auto sales as a result of tax incentives), and continuing signs of some resilience in February-March, we believe that continuing job market deterioration, limited access to credit and weakening confidence will hamper household consumption. We also expect weaker government consumption expansion, on the back of weak fiscal revenue. On the supply side, we project a marked slowdown of agricultural growth in 2009 and some recovery in 2010 following two particularly strong years of investment and external demand. Industrial production growth will contract amid tight credit conditions and weaker exports. Notwithstanding infrastructure investment and government house-building incentives, construction is expected to slow sharply as a result of much weaker private investment. Extractive industries are expected to contract steeply amid a stark slowdown of China's real GDP growth. Capital goods industries will have a much weaker year in 2009, but, on the assumption of a tepid recovery of domestic and external demand towards the end of this year, will strengthen slightly in 2010. Activity in the financial sector, which has been one of the strongest growth areas in recent years, will slow sharply in 2009. This will result from a cautious approach on the part of lenders, especially in the light of a recent increase in delinquency.The government's proposal for the remaining 600,000 is to grant 30-year funding coupled with several subsidies (such as lower loan insurance costs, much lower interest rates and reduced transaction costs), and for households with income between three and six minimum wages, an upfront subsidy of up to 20% of the unit cost. Units will be more or less standardised, and contracts will be settled by Caixa Econ&ocirc;mica Federal (CEF, one of Brazil's giant public banks). The programme will be confined to new homes and participants' credit quality must comply with ordinary standards used by CEF. Other decisions recently announced by the government indicate its concern that besides monetary and fiscal easing, some urgent improvement in private credit markets is needed to reduce the impact of the global crisis on the domestic economy. Despite the recent expansionary credit policies by public banks, if private institutions do not resume minimum levels of new credit origination at lower costs, there will be limited scope for a solid economic recovery this year (see Economic performance). As a result, the Lula government has indicated that it might adopt a more interventionist stance in the banking industry, in an attempt to foster greater competition. In early April the Lula government surprised the financial sector when it announced the replacement of the chief executive officer of Banco do Brasil (BB, Brazil's largest public bank). Antonio Francisco de Lima Neto was replaced by Aldemir Bendine, who is considered to be closer to Mr Mantega. Mr Lima Neto achieved significant success in raising the profitability of the BB to levels comparable to those of major private banks, thanks to cost controlling measures and much stricter credit risk policies. However, the appointment of Mr Bendine is not necessarily a return to traditional practices of politically oriented credit concessions, given his reputation as a respected executive with a lasting career at BB and a deep knowledge of the Brazilian retail banking industry. The government seems to expect that Mr Bendine will be more aggressive in the adoption of measures to promote competition in the sector, in particular, granting credit at costs more aligned to actual risks involved. The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.Besides the tax benefit, increased funding provided by the BB to banks associated with vehicle producers at end-2008 is also believed to be contributing to the sector's recent improved performance. Nonetheless, the availability of credit for the purchase of used vehicles purchases remains relatively depressed, and, given surging delinquency rates, this picture is not expected to improve significantly in the short term. Although the collapse of used vehicles' prices may encourage stronger demand, the market remains credit-dependent. This might weigh negatively on sales of new vehicles in the second quarter given their dependence on the trading in of used vehicles. 
Economic performance: Credit markets have deteriorated further
February credit data compiled by the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) reinforced the perception that economic recovery in Brazil will be to a great extent dependent on private banks resuming more vigorous lending, which so far has remained depressed. Total outstanding credit grew by only 0.3% year on year to R1.23trn (US$5.47trn), remaining stable in relation to January 2008. Outstanding credit held by private-controlled banks dropped for a second consecutive month to R$774bn (US$344bn), which compared with R780bn in January and R782bn in December. Although this contraction was more than offset by the continued solid expansion of credit held by public banks, which increased by R7bn between January and February to R456.6bn, such a dynamic is unlikely to be sustained for much longer. Overall credit performance was helped by a robust expansion of vehicles leasing, which accounted for R63bn of total outstanding credit in February, up from R57.3bn the previous month. A much more pronounced expansion is expected for March given very strong auto sales. By contrast, corporate credit data remained weak. New credit granted to companies at unregulated market rates stood at R78.4bn, compared with R86.6bn a year before. However, weaknesses were widespread among several categories, for both individuals and corporates. This was a clear response to a sudden rise in delinquency levels. Past-due loans amounted to R42.2bn in February, 37.5% higher than a year before. Provision levels also increased sharply, having reached R79.2bn in February, up from R76.8bn in January and R53.4bn a year before. Of the total extra R8.5bn provisions made by private domestic banks in February 2009, R3.2bn was directed to the best quality credit levels. These were probably the first balance sheet effects of the credit derivative losses incurred by companies in the fourth quarter of 2008. Possible further increases in provisions could jeopardize banks' profitability and trigger much tighter credit policies in incoming months. The solid financial position of the Brazilian government and state banks will support countercyclical measures that will mitigate the impact of the global recession. Much weaker fiscal revenue is not expected to have a significant impact on the implementation of the PAC, but there is a risk that it may affect other investment plans, despite a recent reduction in the primary surplus fiscal target. Together, the private sector and Petr&oacute;leo Brasileiro (Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company) account for the bulk of the PAC's programmed investments, and funding for the projects should be made available by the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econ&ocirc;mico e Social (BNDES, the national development bank). On the supply side, we project a marked slowdown of agricultural growth in 2009 and some recovery in 2010 following two particularly strong years of investment and external demand. Industrial production growth will contract amid tight credit conditions and weaker exports. Notwithstanding infrastructure investment and government house-building incentives, construction is expected to slow sharply as a result of much weaker private investment. Extractive industries are expected to contract steeply amid a stark slowdown of China's real GDP growth. Capital goods industries will have a much weaker year in 2009, but, on the assumption of a tepid recovery of domestic and external demand towards the end of this year, will strengthen slightly in 2010. Activity in the financial sector, which has been one of the strongest growth areas in recent years, will slow sharply in 2009. This will result from a cautious approach on the part of lenders, especially in the light of a recent increase in delinquency.The political scene in the past month was marked by the first fall in the popularity of the president, Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da  Silva, in at least 18 months, but also by the consolidation of Brazil's image as an increasingly important player in the global stage, especially after the recent G20 (group of the world's largest economies) meeting. In the meantime, early campaigning for the October 2010 presidential election in Brazil has continued to gather steam amid growing evidence that the domestic economy is falling into recession on the back of the global financial crisis. Three recent opinion polls, by Datafolha, CNI/Ibope and CNT/Sensus (three respected local pollsters), show that Lula's popularity has finally been hit by the impact of the global financial crisis in the Brazilian economy. Although his personal ratings, and those of his government, have remained extremely high, the March surveys may signal a turning point. According to an Ibope opinion poll, Mr da Silva's approval ratings fell to 78% in March, having peaked at 84% in December. The government's approval ratings also fell by 9 percentage points to 64%, according to Ibope, or by 5 points to 65%, according to Datafolha, another polling institute. Ibope's survey pointed to the first decline since September 2007, Datafolha's to the first since the beginning of Lula's second term (January 2007).The recent surveys also indicate that awareness of the global financial crisis and its negative impact on Brazil has increased among the Brazilian electorate. This has impaired Lula's popularity not least because of the government's dismissive discourse in relation to the possible negative effects of the crisis on the domestic economy until recently. Lula even said last year that the international crisis would cause only a "ripple" in the Brazilian economy, a diagnosis which proved completely wrong and has been frequently mentioned by the media.Although the Lula government has managed to raise the country's profile internationally, it seems to have overlooked an offensive by the Chinese government to increase the Asian country's influence and, especially, market access in South America. In recent weeks, Chinese financial assistance projects to Argentina, Ecuador and Venezuela were announced. Although details are not yet available these are all likely to envisage some sort of agreement whereby China would have its market access to these countries increased. Brazil would tend to be negatively affected by these agreements not only in economic terms (both Argentina and Venezuela are important export markets for Brazil) but also in terms of possibly having its leadership in the region weakened in the medium term. Shortly after these agreements were announced, the Brazilian government announced that Lula's official visit to China, scheduled for May, would be shortened from three days to just one day, but no explanation for the change of plan was given. In early April the Lula government surprised the financial sector when it announced the replacement of the chief executive officer of Banco do Brasil (BB, Brazil's largest public bank). Antonio Francisco de Lima Neto was replaced by Aldemir Bendine, who is considered to be closer to Mr Mantega. Mr Lima Neto achieved significant success in raising the profitability of the BB to levels comparable to those of major private banks, thanks to cost controlling measures and much stricter credit risk policies. However, the appointment of Mr Bendine is not necessarily a return to traditional practices of politically oriented credit concessions, given his reputation as a respected executive with a lasting career at BB and a deep knowledge of the Brazilian retail banking industry. The government seems to expect that Mr Bendine will be more aggressive in the adoption of measures to promote competition in the sector, in particular, granting credit at costs more aligned to actual risks involved. The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.With interest rates and bank reserve requirements still extremely high by international standards, there is scope for further monetary easing. If necessary, the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) will extend up to US$36bn in short-term credit lines to companies with foreign loans falling due this year (reserves stood at just over US$200bn in mid-April), although so far eligible firms (typically Brazil's largest) have been able to secure finance at more favourable terms in the voluntary sector. In addition, Brazil is one of the few emerging markets to benefit from special swap facilities in US dollars established by the US Federal Reserve (the Fed, the US central bank) and due to remain in place through end-October. With the major banks well capitalised and restricting lending to the private sector, the sovereign will have little difficulty rolling over the R375bn (US$160bn) in domestic public debt falling due in the next 12 months. Furthermore, the Brazilian sovereign will be well-placed to take advantage of windows of opportunity in the international capital markets to issue foreign bonds at favourable terms.A sharp contraction in domestic demand in 2009 will exert a disinflationary impact, and as a result we anticipate 475 basis points of easing in the first half of this year, taking the benchmark overnight Selic rate to 9% (in its latest March meeting the Central Bank cut the Selic by 150 basis points to 11.25%). This will be the first time since the inflation-targeting regime was adopted in 1999 that nominal interest rates will be in single digits. The Selic could be raised again in 2010 if domestic demand picks up at a stronger pace than we forecast, fuelling renewed inflationary pressures, but at present we expect it to remain on hold. A slow improvement in liquidity conditions and increased government pressure on public banks to reduce commercial lending rates (which will force private institutions to follow through) will reduce the cost of borrowing, although overall it is set to remain very high. With the Central Bank concerned to re-anchor low inflationary expectations following the re-emergence of price pressures in 2008, rates are unlikely to converge more closely towards international levels in 2009-10. The BCB's inflation target remains at 4.5% (plus or minus 2 percentage points) for 2008-09.The downturn in the world economy is set to be the sharpest since the second world war and, despite some easing of the decline in industrial production and trade volumes in some markets in recent weeks, the weakness remains acute in the emerging world. We expect the global economy to contract in 2009 for the first time in decades, both at market exchange rates and at purchasing power parity (PPP), by 2.6% and 1.5%, respectively. Although we expect a recovery to begin in late 2009, the pick-up will be fragile and growth will remain subdued in 2011-13. Brazil's terms of trade will weaken significantly and Brazilian banks, along with major corporate borrowers, will find it increasingly difficult to roll over credit lines as lenders around the world rebuild their balance sheets. However, Brazil's economy is in a position to absorb a significant drop in external capital inflows without this resulting in a balance of payments crisis. To Brazil's potential advantage, one of the few upside risks to our global forecast relates to the possibility that the Chinese government's massive stimulus package could be successful in promoting a more rapid rebound of Chinese demand than our central forecast envisages.On the supply side, we project a marked slowdown of agricultural growth in 2009 and some recovery in 2010 following two particularly strong years of investment and external demand. Industrial production growth will contract amid tight credit conditions and weaker exports. Notwithstanding infrastructure investment and government house-building incentives, construction is expected to slow sharply as a result of much weaker private investment. Extractive industries are expected to contract steeply amid a stark slowdown of China's real GDP growth. Capital goods industries will have a much weaker year in 2009, but, on the assumption of a tepid recovery of domestic and external demand towards the end of this year, will strengthen slightly in 2010. Activity in the financial sector, which has been one of the strongest growth areas in recent years, will slow sharply in 2009. This will result from a cautious approach on the part of lenders, especially in the light of a recent increase in delinquency.In the G20 meeting that took place in London in April, the consolidation of this wider group, which includes several large emerging countries, as an important deliberative forum was in itself a major victory for Brazil. The G20 decided to establish deadlines for the conclusion of the World Bank reform (which is likely to increase the representation of emerging countries) as well as for the revision of the IMF's quotas and also its representation scheme-of April 2010 and January 2011. These were two goals long defended by Brazil. Furthermore, the country's position as an important global economic player was reinforced by the fact that Brazil will actively participate in the plan to help the global economy to recover from the current recession (which envisages injecting US$1.1trn into multilateral institutions, mostly the IMF, which will be directed to lending to the most troubled countries). According to Brazil's minister of finance, Guido Mantega, the country is likely to lend at least US$4.5bn to the Fund (which is the equivalent of its quota with the IMF). The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.February credit data compiled by the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) reinforced the perception that economic recovery in Brazil will be to a great extent dependent on private banks resuming more vigorous lending, which so far has remained depressed. Total outstanding credit grew by only 0.3% year on year to R1.23trn (US$5.47trn), remaining stable in relation to January 2008. Outstanding credit held by private-controlled banks dropped for a second consecutive month to R$774bn (US$344bn), which compared with R780bn in January and R782bn in December. Although this contraction was more than offset by the continued solid expansion of credit held by public banks, which increased by R7bn between January and February to R456.6bn, such a dynamic is unlikely to be sustained for much longer. With interest rates and bank reserve requirements still extremely high by international standards, there is scope for further monetary easing. If necessary, the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) will extend up to US$36bn in short-term credit lines to companies with foreign loans falling due this year (reserves stood at just over US$200bn in mid-April), although so far eligible firms (typically Brazil's largest) have been able to secure finance at more favourable terms in the voluntary sector. In addition, Brazil is one of the few emerging markets to benefit from special swap facilities in US dollars established by the US Federal Reserve (the Fed, the US central bank) and due to remain in place through end-October. With the major banks well capitalised and restricting lending to the private sector, the sovereign will have little difficulty rolling over the R375bn (US$160bn) in domestic public debt falling due in the next 12 months. Furthermore, the Brazilian sovereign will be well-placed to take advantage of windows of opportunity in the international capital markets to issue foreign bonds at favourable terms.The government's proposal for the remaining 600,000 is to grant 30-year funding coupled with several subsidies (such as lower loan insurance costs, much lower interest rates and reduced transaction costs), and for households with income between three and six minimum wages, an upfront subsidy of up to 20% of the unit cost. Units will be more or less standardised, and contracts will be settled by Caixa Econ&ocirc;mica Federal (CEF, one of Brazil's giant public banks). The programme will be confined to new homes and participants' credit quality must comply with ordinary standards used by CEF. The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.Overall credit performance was helped by a robust expansion of vehicles leasing, which accounted for R63bn of total outstanding credit in February, up from R57.3bn the previous month. A much more pronounced expansion is expected for March given very strong auto sales. By contrast, corporate credit data remained weak. New credit granted to companies at unregulated market rates stood at R78.4bn, compared with R86.6bn a year before. However, weaknesses were widespread among several categories, for both individuals and corporates. This was a clear response to a sudden rise in delinquency levels. Past-due loans amounted to R42.2bn in February, 37.5% higher than a year before. Provision levels also increased sharply, having reached R79.2bn in February, up from R76.8bn in January and R53.4bn a year before. The government also announced the extension of term-deposit guarantees from R50,000 (US$22,700) to R200m (US$91m), in an attempt to alleviate the liquidity squeeze that has weighed particularly heavily on smaller banks since September 2008. Although previous measures taken by the government (such as incentives for large banks to purchase the credit portfolios of smaller ones) helped to avoid the failure of many small and medium financial institutions, which account for the bulk of lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, they were not enough to allow them to resume lending. The impact of the recently announced larger deposit insurance coverage is likely to have a limited effect on credit origination in the short term given that most banks are still struggling with rising delinquency (see Economic performance). However, once these problems are properly addressed, the change should work as a major incentive for loan expansion at more solid foundations.
