## Latvia (2009-06-01)

The economy is slowing sharply, and real GDP contracted by 18% in the first quarter of 2009. Although the rate of decline in manufacturing may have stopped accelerating, it is still far too early to talk in terms of the economy bottoming out, and retail sales fell even more sharply in April than a month earlier, in year-on-year terms. Consumer and business confidence will remain weak in 2009, and lending will fall further. Private consumption will be squeezed by higher unemployment, falling real wages and pressure on households' balance sheets from the rise in indebtedness of the past few years. Private consumption and investment will therefore fall in 2009, so imports will decline. However, exports will also fall, because of the global downturn. In 2010, despite a less poor external environment, consumer and business confidence will remain weak, the process of deleveraging will continue to depress consumption, and problems of competitiveness will continue to weigh on exports. We now forecast that real GDP will contract by 17% in 2009 and by 4% in 2010-our forecast for 2009 has been revised down, from 15% previously. Moreover, there remain downside risks to the forecast. The main internal risk for the economy is that domestic demand could fall even more sharply, weakening GDP growth further. There are also risks to foreign sales if Latvia's export markets were to decline by more than we currently expect.Policy over the forecast period will be determined by the programme agreed between Latvia and the IMF in December 2008 to stabilise the economy. The 27-month programme is backed by around US$10.5bn in loans, including US$2.4bn from the Fund. The rest is being provided mainly by the EU and Scandinavian countries. The programme is built around maintaining Latvia's exchange-rate peg. To this end, stringent adjustment measures are being undertaken, including wide-ranging expenditure cuts. Support is being provided for the banking sector. The government has also promised structural reforms, notably to education and healthcare, which are crucial for boosting longer-term growth. Pressure on the public finances may prompt some privatisations.Protecting the currency peg will remain the primary concern of the Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank). However, with the economy in recession, the BoL will also seek to encourage a revival of lending activity. In May the BoL cut its main policy rate, the refinancing rate, from 5% to 4%, following an earlier cut of 100 basis points in March. Monetary policy is likely to be loosened further in 2009, possibly including further cuts to the refinancing rate, although loosening will be limited by the BoL's desire to defend the currency peg. The BoL has regularly had to intervene to support the lat since February 2009 after concerns about Latvia's ability to maintain its exchange-rate peg prompted renewed pressure on the currency.Cracks are appearing in Latvia's commitment to maintaining its exchange-rate peg. In May Andris Skele, a former prime minister, called for the lat to be devalued, saying that the social costs of the government's fiscal cuts were too high. Mr Skele, a leading Latvian businessman, is the founder of the People's Party, the largest party in the governing coalition, and remains, albeit informally, the central figure in the party. The Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank) dismissed Mr Skele's comments, suggesting that he was looking to benefit personally from a devaluation. However, his intervention is significant. Until now there has been little discussion of the possible merits of a devaluation in Latvia-exchange-rate stability has become a matter of national pride and it is seen as unpatriotic to question the peg. Discussion was also repressed by the bringing of charges against an economist and a singer earlier in 2009, under a law designed to prevent currency speculation, after they claimed a devaluation was likely. The "consensus" around maintaining the peg is thus largely passive. If other business figures follow Mr Skele's lead, the course set out under Latvia's IMF programme could face unprecedented questioning. The justice minister, Mareks Seglins, also from the People's Party, has subsequently called for a national debate on devaluation.
Economic policy: The central bank cuts interest rates further
On May 24th the BoL cut its refinancing rate by 1 percentage point, to 4%. This followed a cut of 1 percentage point in March. Growth of bank lending has slowed sharply from the excessively high rates seen during Latvia's economic boom-lending fell in the first quarter (May 2009, Economic performance). Although the BoL would like to encourage easier credit conditions, it is has been constrained in its interest-rate policy by pressure on Latvia's exchange-rate peg. Pressure on the peg, which had abated in the early weeks of 2009, has resumed since February, with the BoL regularly intervening on foreign-exchange markets to support the lat. The BoL's foreign-exchange reserves accordingly fell from US$4.4bn at the end of March to US$4bn in April.Lower interest rates will make it marginally more attractive to borrow, but will not be sufficient to stimulate a revival of lending activity. In the current economic climate most Latvian households and companies will concentrate on reducing their debts; foreign banks operating in Latvia are also trying to reduce their exposure to Latvia by lending less. Moreover, banks appear concerned about the outlook for the currency peg: interest rates for loans in lat are prohibitively expansive compared with rates on foreign-currency loans. The average interest rate for lat loans to households was 20.5% in April, compared with 6.2% for foreign-currency loans.Fears that Latvia was about to devalue the lat sparked panic on European financial markets in the first week of June. A local LVL50m (US$101m) government bond auction failed on June 3rd, prompting sell-offs of currencies elsewhere in eastern Europe and in Sweden, owing to concerns about the possible fallout. Shares of SEB and Swedbank, Swedish banks that are heavily exposed to Latvia, also took a pounding. Worries were sparked in the previous week too, when the Riksbank (the Swedish central bank) borrowed Skr100bn (US$12.6bn) from the Swedish debt agency to bolster its reserves-creating suspicions that it was preparing to support Swedish banks in the event of a lat devaluation-and when a Swedish adviser to the Latvian government was quoted saying that devaluation was a matter of when, not if.Calm subsequently returned, after the Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank) reiterated that devaluation was not being considered. However, the panic comes against a background of a deepening economic downturn in Latvia and signs of dissent in the governing coalition over the austerity measures, as a result of which doubts about whether the government can adhere to the fiscal cuts needed to maintain the credibility of the current peg to the euro for much longer are likely to persist.If Latvia devalues, it is likely to try to repeg the lat at a lower level-moving to a floating exchange rate would end any hope of joining the euro in the foreseeable future. The central question is whether the new peg could be defended. It probably could, with external support. That might well be forthcoming, as it is in the interests of Latvia's external partners to avoid a complete meltdown of the lat, which would exacerbate contagion to foreign banks.The financial account has turned negative. FDI inflows have weakened owing to low investor confidence in the economic outlook and were just US$45m in the first quarter. During the boom years the large current-account deficit was financed predominantly by Latvian banks' borrowing from their parent banks abroad. However, in the first quarter the situation reversed, and Latvian banks paid back more international loans than they attracted new loans, resulting in a net outflow of "other investment" of US$1.2bn. For the second consecutive quarter, therefore, the overall balance on the capital and financial accounts was negative. This resulted in considerable pressure on the lat, and was covered only by running down foreign-exchange reserves: around US$1.6bn has been spent from reserves in the past two quarters to fund the balance-of-payments gap.Central bank governorThe new government is substantially different from its discredited predecessor-New Era controls not just the prime minister's post, but also the Ministry of Economics and the Ministry of Finance. However, parties from the previous administration still hold the balance of power in the coalition, and tensions are likely over spending cuts, particularly as New Era has always had difficult relations with the People's Party and the ZZS. It is possible that these parties could withdraw support for the government later in the forecast period in order to trigger a realignment of the coalition. It is therefore unlikely that the government will survive the forecast period.However, the current measures are unlikely to be enough to stabilise Latvia's public finances. First, as a large proportion of spending is non-discretionary, despite the government's much-heralded approach to target cuts of 40% in current spending, the effect on net spending is surprisingly small. Under current proposals, total spending is to fall by just LVL113m (US$229m) from the budget approved in December 2008, from LVL5.11bn (US$10.7bn) to LVL5bn. Revenue is now forecast at LVL4.15m, compared with LVL4.41m in the original budget. Even assuming that additional spending cuts are added, the net effect may not increase much-cuts are offset to some degree by rising spending on debt repayment and unemployment benefits.It will be increasingly difficult, therefore, to pursue the course of internal devaluation, and if the lat remains overvalued the economy will face levelling out from its current slump into a period of prolonged stagnation. Devaluation would then be the only option to restore growth, providing support for exports and prompting increased import substitution, and would probably have to be accepted despite the short-term dislocation from defaults on euro debt. Cracks are already appearing, with Andris Skele, a former prime minister and the leading figure in the People's Party, calling in May for the lat to be devalued (see The political scene).These comments are also significant politically. The People's Party is keen to see New Era, currently the leading governing party, take responsibility for the painful cuts needed to stabilise the public finances. As a member of the governing coalition, the People's Party has to support these policies formally. However, the party, which is languishing in the polls, may wish to reclaim the prime minister's post in order to rebuild its reputation in the run-up to the election due in October 2010. Mr Skele's and Mr Seglins's comments can be seen as an attempt to distance the People's Party from the government's austerity measures; they reinforce fears that the commitment of some of New Era's coalition partners to the measures is purely tactical and short-term.There are still reasons to think that Latvia might be able to maintain the peg, and as a result, that remains (just) the Economist Intelligence Unit's baseline scenario. The government that took office in March looks much more capable than its unpopular and ineffective predecessor, with a new prime minister, Valdis Dombrovksis, and finance minister, Einars Repse, who are strongly committed to cuts. The government is pushing ahead with long-overdue structural reforms to healthcare and education that will support fiscal consolidation. Moreover, the EU and Scandinavian countries, which are providing the majority of funding under Latvia's stabilisation programme, still prefer for Latvia to keep the peg in order to avoid contagion elsewhere.Finance: Einars Repse (New Era)Latvia will broadly comply with the aspects of its IMF programme needed to ward off a financial crisis, but progress on structural reforms will prove difficult in the face of popular discontent over the economic recession-compromises are likely to weaken reforms substantially. The programme's success is far from assured, given weak political consensus. The IMF suspended funding in March while it waited for the government to prepare a new round of spending cuts and launch structural reforms, but is likely to allow larger budget deficits than originally set down in the programme. It is possible that the government or a succeeding administration, while remaining committed to IMF-backed stabilisation measures, will seek to renegotiate other aspects of the programme. However, the scope for changes is limited if the currency peg is to be maintained.We expect that, at purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates, the world economy will contract by 1.8% in 2009-the worst performance since the second world war-and expand by just 2.1% in 2010. Moreover, there are serious downside risks, most notably from a potential intensification of financial market turbulence causing even more serious disruptions in the real economy. The euro zone, Latvia's largest export market, is forecast to contract by 4.5% in 2009 and by 0.6% in 2010. Estonia, Lithuania, Russia, the UK and Sweden, which are all significant destinations for Latvian exports, will be in recession in 2009. We expect oil prices to fall from an average of US$97.7/barrel for dated Brent Blend crude in 2008 to US$47.5/b in 2009, before rising to US$53.3/b in 2010 as global demand recovers. Lower oil prices will add to deflationary pressures in Latvia.The government continues to work on revisions to the budget for 2009, to be presented in June, that it has said will cut spending in order to keep the budget deficit to 7% of GDP (May 2009, Economic policy). The budget originally targeted a deficit of 5% of GDP, but was based on the assumption that the economy would contract by 5% in 2009; the contraction is now set to be far greater. The budget submitted to parliament for initial discussion at the beginning of June had a deficit of 9.2% of GDP. The government has said that it is preparing additional cuts to be added during the discussion in parliament. The first reading of the budget is due to take place ahead of local and European Parliament elections on June 6th, and the government probably wants to delay announcing the most painful spending cuts until afterwards. Indications are that the IMF will approve the widening of the deficit to 7% of GDP, which will allow the release of additional funding from both the IMF and other lenders under Latvia's stabilisation programme. The Fund has already approved a wider budget deficit for 2009 for Ukraine, following a worse than expected economic performance.Calendar yearHigh inflation and excessive wage growth during Latvia's economic boom in 2004-07 caused the lat to become substantially overvalued. Devaluation would normally be the response. However, the authorities are keen to keep the current peg to the euro. They are concerned that a high proportion of foreign borrowing (over 80% of loans are in euro) means that devaluation would be very disruptive. They also see the prospect of euro entry in 2012-13 as providing an exit strategy from the country's difficulties. They have therefore opted for a course of so-called internal devaluation, reducing real wages and costs, in order to restore competitiveness. The stabilisation programme agreed in December 2008 and backed by the IMF and the EU, among others, was built around maintaining the peg.
