## Brazil (2003-03-01)

Following the depreciation of the Real in 2002, the currency is now close to its lowest level in real terms for more than a decade and appears undervalued on a range of measures. The authorities will have been pleased at the recovery of the Real since October 2002 given its benign impact on inflation, on the public debt dynamics and on the balance sheets of private entities with US-dollar liabilities. However, until voluntary capital inflows resume, an undervalued Real will be an essential part of the ongoing adjustment on the trade and current accounts. Consequently, we believe that the real exchange rate will fluctuate around current levels in 2003. In 2004 we expect the nominal exchange rate to stabilise, representing a modest appreciation in real terms. Central Bank governorThe transfer of power following the October 2002 election went smoothly, underscoring the consolidation of Brazilian democracy. The new president has a strong personal mandate and much goodwill, even from elements of Brazilian society, such as business and finance, that are traditionally hostile to the PT. This reflects the PT's shift towards the centre ground, adopting a more consensual approach. Cabinet appointments, including that of Ant&ocirc;nio Palocci, a respected former PT mayor, as minister of finance and of Henrique Meirelles, a former banker, as governor of the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank), have reassured investors about the government's commitment to orthodox macroeconomic policies and have contributed to a rally in Brazilian asset markets since the elections. The new finance minister, Mr Palocci, has committed himself to maintaining the macroeconomic framework inherited from the government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso: fiscal discipline, a floating exchange rate and inflation targeting. Mr Palocci has stressed his commitment to keeping inflation under control and to generating sufficiently large primary fiscal surpluses to ensure that the government is able to meet its debt obligations. Within the existing policy framework, the new government plans to improve the efficiency of public spending and to implement policies which redistribute income to the poor, particularly the 15% of the population whose basic nutritional needs are not being satisfied. Among legislation accorded priority by the outgoing government are pension reform, the operational independence of the Central Bank and tax reform. The government may pursue a more active industrial policy in an attempt to foster the development of certain sectors, and may also intervene more heavily in consumer-related areas such as utility tariffs.Although the Central Bank again missed its inflation target in 2002, price stabilisation is becoming established in Brazil through structural reforms of the public finances, such as the Fiscal Responsibility Law. This trend should be supported by the forthcoming independence of the BCB, reducing the risk of a return to high inflation or indexation. However, the effects of exchange rate depreciation on input costs in 2002 is still being felt in continued pressure on consumer prices in early 2003, requiring stringent monetary policy to suppress inflation. In the absence of further exchange rate depreciation in 2003, we expect progress on price stabilisation to resume in 2004.The choice of Henrique Meirelles as the new president of the Central Bank is also a move that will reassure the markets. Like his predecessor, Arm&iacute;nio Fraga, Mr Meirelles is an experienced outsider. He had a successful career as the chief executive officer of a US bank, Bank Boston International, before stepping down to run for election in October as a federal deputy in his home state of Goias. Despite coming from a commercial banking background, Mr Meirelles lacks the active trading experience of Mr Fraga. Nonetheless, Mr Meirelles is highly regarded in US financial circles, an attribute that should work to the advantage of the new administration as it seeks to improve the terms on which the public external debt is financed. In order to placate its left-wing critics the government will have to make real progress in the pursuit of key aspects of its popular social agenda. Considerable attention will be focused on one of the government's flagship initiatives, the Zero Fome (Zero Hunger) programme. Comprising more than 50 initiatives, the programme represents the new government's most visible effort to alleviate Brazil's pressing social problems. It is designed to run for four years and has been budgeted at R5bn (around US$1.5bn) over the four-year period, using a combination of cash handouts and investment in local development projects. However, the most high-profile individual initiative-the provision of a R50 monthly cash benefit to be spent on food-has already run into difficulties. Doubts have surfaced regarding the practicalities involved in the scheme's implementation. In particular, there are risks of corruption associated with the delegation of means testing to local committees, and concerns about how to prevent cash handouts being spent on alcohol and tobacco. The distribution of benefit cash cards to families in the pilot scheme municipalities of Piau&iacute;, one of the poorest states in the poverty-stricken north-east of the country, is expected to start at the end of February while, in the same communities, the Caixa Econ&ocirc;mica Federal (the Federal Savings Bank) is to begin a programme of financing the rebuilding of 1,500 homes. While the Zero Hunger programme is not without its critics, it has clearly captured the popular imagination and remains the government's largest practical demonstration of its commitment to social reform. It appears that the government's plans for education and health are less innovative, as they involve the continuation and extension of reforms introduced under the Cardoso government which have already begun to bring significant improvements, particularly in primary school enrolment and child health.Fiscal spending cuts have been accompanied by a tightening of the monetary policy stance in response to a surge in inflationary pressures. Following interest rate rises in both the October and November meetings, the monetary policy committee (Copom) of the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) raised rates again in December, January and February. The government's determination to squeeze out inflation was also confirmed by a detailed report on inflationary performance and monetary strategy presented on January 21st by the new president of the Central Bank, Henrique Meirelles. The report was produced in compliance with a legal requirement that the Central Bank president should provide the minister of finance with a detailed explanation and plan of action when there is a significant overshooting of the inflation target. With consumer price inflation having exceeded the target ceiling by seven percentage points in 2002, Mr Meirelles pledged in the report to redouble efforts to bring price pressures under control in 2003-04. A "strategy of convergence" was outlined, in which the existing central inflation targets for 2003 and 2004 (4% and 3.75% respectively, with a 2.5 percentage point margin of tolerance) would be retained, but with adjustments to allow for the inflationary momentum sparked by depreciation and the effect of adjustments in administered prices. In concrete terms, the introduction of these adjustments has had the result that the inflation target was raised from 4% (plus or minus 2.5 percentage points) to an upper limit of 8.5% in 2003 and from 3.75% to 5.5% in 2004.During his election campaign, Mr da Silva's promises in the area of industrial policy were general statements of intent rather than concrete proposals: to assist exporters, increase the transparency in public procurement projects and rule out re-nationalisation. Since his election victory, there has been little information on the new government's approach to competition regulation, the reform of the Imposto Sobre Produtos Industrializados (IPI, Industrial Products Tax) and the evolution of support for training and research and development, although there has been some clarification of the overall stance of industrial policy. The new president of the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econ&ocirc;mico e Social (BNDES, National Social and Economic Development Bank) Carlos Lessa, a former Chancellor of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, has indicated that the strategic emphasis of the bank will be changed. In a key speech on January 17th, Mr Lessa indicated that he wished to see the role of the BNDES revert to that of a traditional development bank with the emphasis on the provision of long-term financing for strategically and socially important industries. Adopting surprisingly strident rhetoric, he also took the opportunity to criticise the policies of neo-liberalism which, he argued, had guided the management of the Brazilian economy during the 1990s. The BNDES, established in the early 1950s, is Brazil's largest provider of long-term finance for capital investment and export activity in the industrial sector. Since 1990, in addition to its traditional industrial financing activities, the bank had become heavily involved in the privatisation process as an important provider of credit lines to purchasers of public-sector companies. The government includes PT figures who have, in the past, been hostile to privatisations, but there is no suggestion that renationalisation is on the agenda. A pragmatic approach has been indicated, with the remaining state banks and utilities (particularly in the electricity sector) the main candidates. In mid-January, the minister of finance announced that he was to initiate the privatisation of four federally owned former state banks in Maranh&atilde;o, Cear&aacute;, Piau&iacute; and Santa Catarina.An assessment by the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) of inflation in 2002 has estimated that almost half of the price increases during the year could be attributed to the effects of currency depreciation, 14.8% to hikes in administered prices, including fuel, and 13.2% to an increase in inflationary expectations. Most of the increase in administered prices so far is accounted for by rising fuel prices, but there is also growing pressure on the government to raise electricity prices, in response to problems in the electricity industry (see Infrastructure). The Brazilian electricity industry suffers not only from a lack of installed distribution capacity but also from insufficient investment in generating plant, especially in the heavily populated south and south-east. Under the Cardoso administration the Ministry of Mines and Energy and the BNDES development bank attempted to encourage foreign investment in stand-alone fossil fuel powered generating stations. However, to date only a small proportion of this envisaged capacity has come on stream. The lack of investment is partly explained by the persistence of regulatory uncertainty and the failure of administered electricity prices to rise to a level sufficient to guarantee the long-term profitability of investment. Investment has also been discouraged by the financially precarious state of many electricity distribution companies, resulting in growing debts to the generators. The growing difficulties were illustrated on February 10th, when the BNDES was forced to roll over debt-service payments owed by eight electricity distributors. Given the fiscal constraints now faced by the federal government, it is unlikely that additional public funds will be available to relieve the problem, leaving the authorities little choice but to take the politically unpopular decision to increase the real price of electricity paid by consumers to distributors.The effect of exchange rate depreciation is apparent in the improvement in export performance in the second half of 2002, after a 13.4% year-on-year contraction in the first half. The latest data from the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) on export composition by broad category for the January-November period suggests that manufactured exports performed less strongly than basic products and semi-manufactures, but there was wide divergence between manufacturing sectors. A US$570m decline in aviation exports was largely offset by higher sales from the automotive and iron and steel sectors. Earnings from manufactures were also deflated by falling prices: according to official estimates, volumes were up by 5.2% for the year as a whole but this was offset by lower dollar prices. Another reason for the lagging performance of manufactures has been the collapse of the Argentinian market, which accounted for 8.6% of all exports in 2001. Earnings from manufacturing exports to Argentina fell by 55.4% in the whole of 2002, while those to the rest of the world were up by a healthy 9.1% despite lower prices.January 2003 figures show no sign of a reversal of the trend in the trade balance, with a surplus of US$1.2bn, compared with only US$170m in the year-earlier period. This improvement stemmed from a 21% year-on-year increase in export earnings and 4% decline in import spending. The Central Bank has forecast a trade surplus of US$16bn in 2003, on the assumption that export growth will be sufficient to outstrip an upturn in imports resulting from higher GDP growth.The spread between deposit and lending rates remains high, with the average rate for personal loans at 91.8% in December 2002, up from 80% six months earlier, contributing to the weakness of domestic household demand. While domestic lending to industry picked up in the second half of the year, consumer credit has been flat.The manufacturing sector is likely to benefit from the reorientation of industrial policy (see Economic policy) to provide more active encouragement to the capital goods and export sectors through the provision of credit on favourable terms. A BNDES programme designed to provide finance to increase the capacity for domestic production of equipment for the oil exploration and production industry will provide a boost to the capital goods sector. A major beneficiary of support for export activity is likely to be Embraer, Brazil's most important manufacturing exporter. The company, which has traditionally has accounted for a substantial portion of the allocation of official export finance, has recently suffered a sharp decline in sales as a direct result of the downturn in the international air transport industry. In mid-February it announced that delivery forecasts for 2003 and 2004 have been cut.Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva of the left-wing Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) assumed the presidency on January 1st 2003. The PT lacks a working majority in Congress, which threatens to slow the legislative process. Mr da Silva has promised a social revolution to address widespread problems of poverty. The challenge will be to reconcile this with an orthodox economic policy stance, needed to gain investor confidence and maintain the support of the IMF. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the incoming government to meet the 2003 target of a primary fiscal surplus of 4.25% of GDP, but this outcome may not be sufficient to stabilise the public debt/GDP ratio without a decline in real interest rates. In the absence of a recovery in capital inflows, the Real is likely to remain at highly competitive levels, which will facilitate further adjustment on the trade accounts, but make it harder to reduce inflation. High interest rates will suppress private-sector domestic demand, while public spending is tightly constrained and external demand is weak. As a result, GDP growth will be modest in 2003 (led by higher net exports resulting from the weakness of the exchange rate), but we expect growth to improve in 2004.Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva of the left-wing Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) assumed the presidency in January. The PT lacks a working majority in Congress, which threatens to slow the legislative process. Mr da Silva has promised a social revolution to address widespread problems of poverty, but will struggle to reconcile this with an orthodox economic policy stance to gain investor confidence and maintain IMF support. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the 2003 target of a primary fiscal surplus of 4.25% of GDP to be met, but this may not be sufficient to stabilise the public debt/GDP ratio without a decline in real interest rates. In the absence of a recovery in capital inflows, the Real is likely to remain at highly competitive levels, which will facilitate further adjustment on the trade accounts but make it harder to reduce inflation. High interest rates will suppress private-sector domestic demand, alongside tightly controlled public spending and weak external demand. As a result, GDP growth will be modest in 2003 (led by higher net exports resulting from the weakness of the exchange rate), but we expect growth to improve in 2004.The new government's macroeconomic policy stance continues that of its predecessor. Fiscal results in 2002 were positive but the debt/GDP ratio has grown, and targets have been tightened. Spending plans have been cut. Monetary policy has also been tightened. Rural development has been made a priority and a reorientation of industrial policy has been announced.The trade surplus has swelled, with broadly based export growth and import spending suppressed by weak domestic demand and low financial inflows. The current-account deficit has narrowed to under 2% of GDP. Foreign investment has slowed and lower debt inflows have resulted in a reduction of external private debt. Policy towards the FTAA remains largely unchanged.The primary fiscal surplus target for 2003 of 3.75% of GDP, agreed with the IMF in 2002, has been revised to 4.25%. Although an increase in inflation will help to lift revenue, discretionary spending plans for 2003 have been severely curtailed to reach the new target. The government's ability to carry out its planned social programmes in the medium term will depend on progress on structural reforms, particularly to the social security system for public-sector workers which generated a fiscal gap of more than 4% of GDP in 2002. Although it will be difficult to steer the required legislation through Congress, the Economist Intelligence Unit assumes that some progress will be made early in the new government's term. An increase in the primary surplus will improve the public debt dynamics, releasing more resources to retire debt and bringing down the risk premium. The new government has acted quickly to remove lingering market concerns about its commitment to the tough macroeconomic stance necessary to bolster price stability and reduce the accumulation of public debt. In response to an increase in inflationary pressure, both fiscal and monetary policy have been tightened. Relations with the IMF are good and business confidence has improved as a result of the indications that government intends to maintain the orthodox approach to macroeconomic policy of its predecessor. However, the problems of the large public debt and the economy's resultant vulnerability to shocks remain important risk factors. In this context, the authorities have the difficult task of balancing fiscal prudence and price stability with progress on fulfilling its electors' expectations for improvements in social welfare and employment. 
Economic policy: Tight fiscal management is not enough to bring down debt
Despite the healthy primary balance, the public-sector borrowing requirement in 2002 remained unsustainably high, at 10.28% of GDP, because of interest payments on the large public debt. The interest burden was increased in 2002 by rising interest rates and the depreciation of the currency. Exchange rate depreciation also pushed up the value of the stock of public debt, so that by the end of the year net public debt had grown to 55.9% of GDP, up from 52.6% a year earlier. With higher interest rates and a weaker currency raising the debt service burden for 2003, the new finance minister, Ant&ocirc;nio Palocci, announced on February 10th that the primary surplus target for the non-financial public sector in 2003 would increase from 3.75% to 4.25% of GDP. The statement, which coincided with the arrival of an IMF team, is clearly designed to demonstrate the administration's commitment to conservative macroeconomic management. But while the IMF and financial markets have been satisfied with the government's stance, the public spending cuts are bound to create disquiet within the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) and among others in governing coalition. The rises in interest rates introduced so far have helped to prevent any further sharp slides in the Real and to strengthen confidence in the new government's macroeconomic orthodoxy. However, they will also depress the level of economic activity and increase interest costs on the nominal public-sector deficit, raising public-sector indebtedness. The government will be keen to engineer a loosening of monetary policy once price pressures abate. The hesitant return of confidence since the October 2002 elections has been reflected in the performance of Brazil's financial markets. In the currency market, the positive impression given by the new administration and strong trade performance allowed the exchange rate to appreciate from R3.95:US$1 in October to R3.28:US$1 by mid-January, but continued concerns about debt dynamics, inflation and economic prospects have brought it back to around R3.5:US$1 since then. Reflecting the improvement in sentiment, the Bovespa S&atilde;o Paulo stock exchange index moved sharply upwards between October and December last year, although it, too, had fallen back by 9% between the start of this year and the end of February. Mirroring the developments in the foreign exchange markets and stockmarkets, the average spread of Brazilian government bonds over their US equivalents has narrowed, but remains high by international standards. Between December 30th 2002 and the February 13th 2003, Brazilian sovereign debt spreads declined by just over 100 basis points. The established civil aviation companies have been hit not only by weak demand but also by the effects of currency depreciation and the emergence of a new low-cost domestic challenger, Gol. Unable to raise ticket prices in response to the rising local currency cost of fuel, aircraft leasing costs and spare parts, the established companies-which are burdened with a heavy cost structure and unprofitable routes-have hit serious financial difficulties. On February 6th the two largest airlines, Varig and TAM, announced their intention to pursue a merger, with completion expected within six months. The aim is to achieve economies of scale and increased market power on key routes. With an estimated 70% share of Brazil's passenger traffic, the new enterprise is likely to come under scrutiny from the Commiss&atilde;o Administrativa da Defesa Econ&ocirc;mica, (CADE, the competition regulator). However, early indications are that the merger might be favoured, with recent reports suggesting that the BNDES has already been formulating a plan to refinance the debts of the two airlines following a merger.
Foreign trade and payments: External private debt diminishes
Restricted access to foreign private-sector finance has sharply reduced private external indebtedness, but this has been offset by the increase in public-sector external debt. Most of the increase in public-sector debt is accounted for by Brazil's borrowing from the IMF, under an agreement reached in August 2002. The IMF support has helped to support the currency, and has ensured that despite investor nervousness at the end of 2002, gross international reserves were sufficient to provide a cushion against shocks, with around 9-10 months of import cover. In December 2002 reserves on a liquid assets basis were US$37.8bn, up from US$35.9bn a year earlier.Finance	Ant&ocirc;nio PalocciTo fulfil the urgent need to provide reassurance to the markets, Mr da Silva made sure that his economic team consisted of officials who enjoyed the confidence of the business community. At its head is the minister of finance, Ant&ocirc;nio Palocci, a standard-bearer for the pragmatic wing of the PT. As mayor of Ribeir&atilde;o Preto, a city in the interior of S&atilde;o Paulo state, Mr Palocci had gained a reputation as an efficient and honest administrator with a strong commitment to responsible fiscal management. He mastermind Mr da Silva's election campaign and since October headed the government's transition team, to ensure policy continuity and a smooth handover. The minister of planning, budget and management is Guido Mantega, a professor at the prestigious Get&uacute;lio Vargas business school in S&atilde;o Paulo and one of the PT's leading economic thinkers for many years. His approach is considered to be more traditional leftist than that of Mr Palocci, but he has embraced the principles of cautious macroeconomic management. The government's relatively market-friendly policy orientation will be further bolstered by the new minister for development, industry and commerce, Luiz Fernando Furlan. Like Mr Alencar, Mr Furlan established his reputation in industry, having been head of Sadia, one of Brazil's leading food processors and exporters.The task of the CDES will be a difficult one given the controversial nature of the legislative proposals it is to consider. In an indication of the direction from which opposition to legislation on tax, social security and labour law reform will come, the administration has faced some preliminary barracking from a group of radical hard-left PT congressmen and women that may indicate difficulties ahead. Around one-third of the PT's 91 deputies are radicals. They are led by a senator, Heloisa Helena, and two deputies, Luciana Genro and Jos&eacute; Ara&uacute;jo. Ms Helena's virulent opposition to Mr Sarney's candidacy for the presidency of the Senate was embarrassing for Mr da Silva at a time of delicate negotiations with the PMDB, and a strongly worded critical assault launched by Mr Ara&uacute;jo against the newly appointed finance minister, Mr Palocci, has drawn the battle lines. The radicals describe Mr Palocci's macroeconomic orthodoxy as "neo-liberal", even though the government has indicated its preference for a more interventionist form of economic management than that of its predecessor. The radicals will be deterred from voting against the government while Mr da Silva's popularity remains high, but if current expectations of the government begin to give way to disappointment, their political significance is likely to grow.The government has promised to strengthen official trade finance and export promotion strategies, and in mid-January announced the creation of a new export promotion agency, Apex-Brasil, which will receive substantial funding from the Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade. A target of 10% export growth has been set for 2003; this is expected to create 400,000 new jobs.Following Luis In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva's second-round victory in the October 2002 presidential elections, a new ministerial team has been selected, new alliances forged in Congress and a credible short- to medium-term economic programme put into operation. Despite the relative lack of experience of many of its key members, the incoming administration has won broad approval for its performance in its first few weeks in office. Mr da Silva's choice of ministers has underlined the administration's generally pragmatic and moderate stance across a range of economic, social and international issues. Even before assuming office, he showed his commitment to moderation in his choice of vice-presidential running-mate, Jos&eacute; Alencar, a member of the right-of-centre Partido Liberal (PL, Liberal Party) and head of one of Brazil's most successful textile manufacturers. Nervousness in the financial markets has also been eased by his cabinet announcements in mid-December, in which all of the most important portfolios were awarded to moderates, some with substantial business or political experience. The new government's performance in office will largely depend on two factors: the evolution of the government's relationship with Congress and the ability of the new ministerial team to effectively articulate policy and avoid the infighting that damaged its predecessor.While the appointees responsible for overall control of macroeconomic policy are moderates, Mr Lula da Silva has also brought in some of his more radical traditional core supporters in ministries concerned with welfare provision and social reforms. These include: Christovam Buarque, a popular figure within the PT, as the new minister of education; Jacques Wagner, a former president of the Chemical Workers' Union and veteran PT activist, as the minister of labour; Ricardo Berzoini, a mainstream PT member and former official in a financial sector trade union, as minister for social security; Benedita da Silva, a PT veteran from a working class background, as minister for social assistance and promotion; and Marina Silva, a former activist in the radical Association of Rubber Tappers, as minister for the environment. Ms Silva is regarded as the most radical member of the new cabinet. A veteran PT activist, Dilma Roussef, has also been appointed as minister of mines and energy, indicating that there is likely to be little enthusiasm for further privatisations in these sectors.The lower availability of external financing during 2002 is apparent in the capital account, which shows a decline in net total capital inflows, from US$28bn in 2001 to US$12bn in 2002. This was the result of lower FDI, strong net portfolio outflows and a sharp contraction of net lending. In order to meet the new target, the planned primary surplus for the central government was increased from 2.25% of projected GDP to 2.45% in 2003. Revised exchange rate, inflation, growth and wage forecasts have resulted in a downward adjustment in expected net central government revenue as a percentage of GDP and an increase in expected non-discretionary spending commitments. The result is that the allocation for discretionary spending in the 2003 budget will need to be cut by almost one-quarter. Although social programmes have been prioritised, they have still been cut. Most seriously affected have been the newly created Ministry of Cities, whose budget has been squeezed to 15% of the amount originally planned, and the Ministry of National Integration, where the spending will only by 10% of that planned. Other ministries badly affected include those for tourism, human rights and sport. 
The domestic economy: Policy tightening squeezes recovery

