## Iceland (2010-05-01)

The general election in April 2009 resulted in victory for a centre-left coalition comprising the Social Democratic Alliance (SDA) and the Left-Green Movement (LGM). The Independence Party (IP), which had been the dominant governing party for several decades before being forced out of office in January 2009, is now in opposition, although it has recovered remarkably strongly, helped by fostering the impression that the current government was too weak in its initial handling of the issue of compensation to the UK and the Netherlands governments to repay insured depositors with Icesave, the Internet banking arm of a failed bank, Landsbanki. The present government led by the prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir (SDA), has a narrow overall parliamentary majority, with 34 of the 63 seats in the Althingi (parliament). Ms Sigurdardottir has had to work closely with the LGM leader and minister of finance, Steingrimur Sigfusson, in introducing unpopular measures viewed as necessary to deal with the crisis that the government has inherited. On many issues, such as investment in the energy sector, the two governing parties openly disagree and this is unlikely to change. What matters is their ability to agree on a core minimum of action necessary to rehabilitate the economy and public finances following the impact of the financial crisis on Iceland, which was even more devastating than in most other OECD economies.The collapse in October 2008 of three major Icelandic banks that had over-expanded abroad still has repercussions for Iceland's foreign relations. To the embarrassment of the two governing parties, an agreement that they negotiated in 2009 with the UK and the Netherlands was put to a referendum on March 6th 2010 by the head of state, Olafur Ragnar Grimsson. The outcome of the referendum was an almost unanimous rejection of the terms of the deal. As a result, the government has had to negotiate with the opposition on a new stance to demand a modification of the terms of the loan that the UK and the Netherlands were to provide Iceland to repay depositors. Although the UK and the Netherlands have agreed to negotiate changes, it remains to be seen whether a new agreement that satisfies all major Icelandic parties can be reached. Negotiations have been delayed by the UK election in early May and the forthcoming election in the Netherlands in early June.Policy over the near term will continue to be driven by the need to stabilise the economy and rebuild the country's banking system, following the collapse of Iceland's three main commercial banks and the currency, the krona, in September-October 2008. Government policy has been, and will remain, conditioned by a programme agreed with the IMF in November 2008. The IMF agreement comprises three main elements: currency stabilisation, bank restructuring and fiscal consolidation. The first goal is being pursued through capital controls. Despite evidence of continuing circumvention, these have helped to slow down the depreciation of the currency. Capital controls on existing holdings were tightened in early November 2009, but an exemption was granted for new investments. It is unlikely that any major relaxation will occur before late 2010 at the earliest, although a strategy for their gradual lifting has been published. The three failed Icelandic banks were restructured in 2009. Glitnir and Kaupthing (now Islandsbanki and Arion) have been mainly taken over by foreign creditors. Landsbanki is 80% state-owned, with 20% owned by creditors. A new banking regulatory structure will be put in place. The third main element of the IMF scheme is fiscal restructuring (see Fiscal policy).The public finances suffered a massive deterioration in 2008-09. In 2009 the general government accounts showed a deficit of 9.1% of GDP, following large surpluses of over 5% of GDP in 2006 and 2007 and a small deficit of 0.6% of GDP in 2008. Although the 2009 deficit was significantly lower than had been thought likely, it still rose by over 8 percentage points of GDP, reflecting sharply falling revenue as a result of weak domestic demand, lower profits and earnings, together with increased public expenditure on unemployment benefit and debt interest payments. Gross government debt is expected to increase from 28% of GDP at end-2007 to about 130% of GDP at end-2010, partly as a result of meeting the obligations of the three failed Icelandic banks and the injection of new funds to recapitalise them. However, net debt should be kept to a more manageable ratio of about 60% of GDP. The 2009 budget already provided for substantial expenditure cuts in both current and capital spending. The 2010 budget included a range of tax increases on middle- and higher-income earners, on wealth, on energy and an increase in value-added tax (VAT). The government is expected to introduce further expenditure cuts worth about 2% of GDP and tax rises worth 1% in its 2011 budget, which is due at the beginning of October. There is a risk that parliament fails to pass the budget, leading to the fall of the government. However, our central forecast is that it will be passed with further corrective measures sufficient to lower the deficit to 5.4% of GDP in 2011.The Central Bank of Iceland has continued reducing its policy interest rates, the last 50-basis-point cut being on May 5th, despite the fact that, after falling from 18.6% in January 2009 to 6.6% in January 2010, inflation edged up to 8.3% in April. This is boosted by higher energy prices and higher consumption taxes, so the underlying rate is around 7%. The main policy rate, which is considered to be that on 28-day certificates of deposit, is now 8.25%. A major objective of Central Bank policy is exchange-rate stability, and it has achieved this in recent months as a result of capital controls. We expect the exchange rate to remain stable during much of 2010, but to weaken once exchange controls are eased, which could be from late 2010. Inflation, and therefore interest rates, should continue to fall slowly during 2010, followed by a slight rise during 2011. However, there is a risk that when capital controls are substantially eased, the exchange rate may fall sharply again, in which case interest rates would be likely to rise.The bankruptcy of the Icelandic financial sector in late 2008 contributed to a severe fall in domestic purchasing power and consequently in domestic demand in 2009, which was deeper than in most other developed economies. Domestic demand should level during 2010, although we forecast that it will continue to fall slightly year on year. A modest recovery in domestic demand is expected in 2011, but it will remain well below its 2007 levels. Investment had already begun to fall in 2007 as several large-scale projects were completed, and the decline accelerated in 2008 and 2009, as all forms of private investment were hit by severe credit conditions and low demand prospects. We forecast that investment will bottom out in 2010 and recover slightly in 2011. Private consumption declined by 14.6% in 2009 as a result of a large fall in disposable income and debt repayment. We expect a further decline in disposable income and private consumption in 2010, followed by stabilisation in 2011.Policy over the near term will continue to be driven by the need to stabilise the economy and rebuild the country's banking system, following the collapse of Iceland's three main commercial banks and the currency, the krona, in September-October 2008. Government policy has been, and will remain, conditioned by a programme agreed with the IMF in November 2008. The IMF agreement comprises three main elements: currency stabilisation, bank restructuring and fiscal consolidation. The first goal is being pursued through capital controls. Despite evidence of continuing circumvention, these have helped to slow down the depreciation of the currency. Capital controls on existing holdings were tightened in early November 2009, but an exemption was granted for new investments. It is unlikely that any major relaxation will occur before late 2010 at the earliest, although a strategy for their gradual lifting has been published. The three failed Icelandic banks were restructured in 2009. Glitnir and Kaupthing (now Islandsbanki and Arion) have been mainly taken over by foreign creditors. Landsbanki is 80% state-owned, with 20% owned by creditors. A new banking regulatory structure will be put in place. The third main element of the IMF scheme is fiscal restructuring (see Fiscal policy).The bankruptcy of the Icelandic financial sector in late 2008 contributed to a severe fall in domestic purchasing power and consequently in domestic demand in 2009, which was deeper than in most other developed economies. Domestic demand should level during 2010, although we forecast that it will continue to fall slightly year on year. A modest recovery in domestic demand is expected in 2011, but it will remain well below its 2007 levels. Investment had already begun to fall in 2007 as several large-scale projects were completed, and the decline accelerated in 2008 and 2009, as all forms of private investment were hit by severe credit conditions and low demand prospects. We forecast that investment will bottom out in 2010 and recover slightly in 2011. Private consumption declined by 14.6% in 2009 as a result of a large fall in disposable income and debt repayment. We expect a further decline in disposable income and private consumption in 2010, followed by stabilisation in 2011.The general election in April 2009 resulted in victory for a centre-left coalition comprising the Social Democratic Alliance (SDA) and the Left-Green Movement (LGM). The Independence Party (IP), which had been the dominant governing party for several decades before being forced out of office in January 2009, is now in opposition, although it has recovered remarkably strongly, helped by fostering the impression that the current government was too weak in its initial handling of the issue of compensation to the UK and the Netherlands governments to repay insured depositors with Icesave, the Internet banking arm of a failed bank, Landsbanki. The present government led by the prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir (SDA), has a narrow overall parliamentary majority, with 34 of the 63 seats in the Althingi (parliament). Ms Sigurdardottir has had to work closely with the LGM leader and minister of finance, Steingrimur Sigfusson, in introducing unpopular measures viewed as necessary to deal with the crisis that the government has inherited. On many issues, such as investment in the energy sector, the two governing parties openly disagree and this is unlikely to change. What matters is their ability to agree on a core minimum of action necessary to rehabilitate the economy and public finances following the impact of the financial crisis on Iceland, which was even more devastating than in most other OECD economies.Iceland's security policy is based on NATO membership. After the closure of the Keflavik US military air base and the departure of US forces in 2006, Iceland assumed a more active role with regard to security, although it has recently had to scale back its operations for financial reasons. It will continue to co-operate with its Nordic neighbours-having signed bilateral agreements with Norway and Denmark-and with other European NATO members.The bankruptcy of the Icelandic financial sector in late 2008 contributed to a severe fall in domestic purchasing power and consequently in domestic demand in 2009, which was deeper than in most other developed economies. Domestic demand should level during 2010, although we forecast that it will continue to fall slightly year on year. A modest recovery in domestic demand is expected in 2011, but it will remain well below its 2007 levels. Investment had already begun to fall in 2007 as several large-scale projects were completed, and the decline accelerated in 2008 and 2009, as all forms of private investment were hit by severe credit conditions and low demand prospects. We forecast that investment will bottom out in 2010 and recover slightly in 2011. Private consumption declined by 14.6% in 2009 as a result of a large fall in disposable income and debt repayment. We expect a further decline in disposable income and private consumption in 2010, followed by stabilisation in 2011.Merchandise and services trade moved from a deficit in 2008 to a surplus in 2009 as a result of lower imports and moderately higher export earnings. Financial payments in winding-up proceedings related to financial institutions kept the current account in deficit. We expect the current account to record small surpluses in 2010-11.The collapse in October 2008 of three major Icelandic banks that had over-expanded abroad still has repercussions for Iceland's foreign relations. To the embarrassment of the two governing parties, an agreement that they negotiated in 2009 with the UK and the Netherlands was put to a referendum on March 6th 2010 by the head of state, Olafur Ragnar Grimsson. The outcome of the referendum was an almost unanimous rejection of the terms of the deal. As a result, the government has had to negotiate with the opposition on a new stance to demand a modification of the terms of the loan that the UK and the Netherlands were to provide Iceland to repay depositors. Although the UK and the Netherlands have agreed to negotiate changes, it remains to be seen whether a new agreement that satisfies all major Icelandic parties can be reached. Negotiations have been delayed by the UK election in early May and the forthcoming election in the Netherlands in early June.
