## Iceland (2011-05-01)

In the near term policy should continue to be driven by the need to stabilise the economy and rebuild the banking system after the collapse of Iceland's three main commercial banks and currency, the krona, in late 2008. However, policy consistency is threatened by the possibility of government collapse and subsequent instability. At present, policy is still conditioned by a programme for fiscal and banking reform and currency stabilisation agreed with the IMF in November 2008, subject to several reviews, the fourth of which took place in February 2011. The programme is due to end in August 2011, but some form of co-operation will probably continue. As a result of capital controls, apart from an exception for new investment since November 2009, the currency has been more stable. Relaxation of capital controls is expected to begin in the second half of 2011, but will be a slow process and may not be completed until 2015. Iceland's three main banks were restructured in 2009 and their balance sheets reduced. The domestic arms of Glitnir and Kaupthing (now Islandsbanki and Arion, respectively) have been mainly taken over by foreign creditors. Landsbanki is 80% state-owned, with 20% owned by creditors.The coalition of the Social Democratic Alliance (SDA) and the Left-Green Movement (LGM), which has been in power since April 2009, is divided and faces strengthening opposition from the Independence Party (IP) and the Progressive Party (PP). The IP was the dominant governing party for decades before being forced from office in 2009. Despite having to accept a high share of responsibility for the economic and financial collapse of 2008, it has recovered ground, helped by fostering the impression that in 2009 the coalition was too weak in its handling of the terms of a loan to compensate the UK and Dutch governments regarding insured depositors with Icesave, the Internet arm of a failed Icelandic bank, Landsbanki. Following the rejection by voters of a revised loan deal in a referendum in April 2011, the dispute will go to the European Free-Trade Association (EFTA) Surveillance Authority.The collapse in October 2008 of Iceland's three major commercial banks that over-expanded abroad has had major repercussions for foreign relations up to the present date. Relations with the UK and Netherlands became tense after the president of Iceland, Olafur Grimsson, decided that a controversial agreement with these countries on a loan to compensate British and Dutch savers with Icesave should be put to a referendum, was decisively rejected in March 2010. A revised agreement with less stringent terms for Iceland was reached in late 2010 and ratified by parliament by 44 votes to 16 in February 2011. However, the president again put it to a referendum and the loan deal was again rejected in April. As a result, legal action will be taken by the UK and the Netherlands, first at the EFTA Surveillance Authority (Iceland is a member of EFTA).The public finances suffered a massive deterioration in 2008-09. The general government accounts showed a deficit of 10% of GDP in 2009 and 7.8% in 2010, after large surpluses of over 5% of GDP in 2006-07. The large 2009 deficit reflected sharply falling revenue owing to weak domestic demand, lower profits and earnings, together with increased spending on unemployment benefit and debt interest payments. Gross government debt is estimated to have risen from 28% of GDP at end-2007 to about 120% at end-2010, partly as a result of the recapitalisation of the failed commercial banks and central bank. Net debt was a more manageable 43% of GDP at end-2010, according to Statistics Iceland.The Central Bank of Iceland has been steadily lowering its policy interest rates. The indicative policy rate (maximum bid rate on 28-day certificates of deposit) now stands at 4%, not far above inflation of 2.8% in April 2011. Inflation has been rising in recent months and is likely to continue to rise gradually in the coming months, which may prompt the Central Bank to begin to raise rates. Exchange-rate stability is a major policy objective and is mainly being achieved through capital controls at present. We expect the krona to weaken after the controls are lifted, but any easing of controls is likely to be limited.The bankruptcy of the Icelandic financial sector in late 2008 contributed to a severe fall in domestic purchasing power and consequently to a fall of 21% in domestic demand in 2009. Domestic demand continued to contract in 2010 and GDP fell by 3.5% for the year as a whole. Investment has fallen particularly severely and in 2010 was little more than one-quarter of its peak level in 2006. We forecast a moderate recovery in investment of 3% a year in 2011-12. Private consumption declined by 16% in 2009 owing to a large fall in disposable income and debt repayment. After continuing to decline in January-June 2010, it began to recover in the third quarter. Even so, the whole year still showed a small decline. We forecast a slight pick-up of 1% in both 2011 and 2012.The coalition has only a narrow overall majority, with 32 of the 63 seats in the Althingi (parliament). Its majority fell by two in March 2011, when two LGM members of parliament (MPs) announced that they would no longer support the government. The prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir (SDA), has had to work closely with the LGM leader and minister of finance, Steingrimur Sigfusson, to introduce unpopular measures viewed as necessary to deal with the crisis that the government inherited. The left wing of the LGM has openly disagreed with key policies, including the IMF programme that is central to the government's economic strategy. Divisions in the LGM came into sharp focus in December 2010, when three LGM MPs voted with the opposition against the 2011 budget, which was subsequently passed by only one vote. The Economist Intelligence Unit's central forecast remains that the coalition will continue during 2011-12, but the risk of breakdown is considerable.Security policy is based on NATO membership. After the Keflavik US military air base closed and US forces left in 2006, Iceland assumed a more active role in security, but has now had to scale back operations for financial reasons. It will continue to co-operate with its Nordic neighbours-bilateral agreements with Norway and Denmark are in place-and other European NATO members.
