## Ireland (2011-04-01)

After a promising start in March, the government has already run into difficulty in its efforts to renegotiate Ireland's bail-out package with the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and the IMF (the so-called "troika"). This is likely to cause a sharp drop in public confidence in the government's ability to manage the economic crisis. With no concessions offered by the troika and with the government's popularity sinking, there is a risk that the new Irish government will push back against the troika. One way that this could be manifested is that the government could decide to impose haircuts on some senior bondholders. This could cause contagion in the euro zone, and would significantly damage Dublin's relations with the EU. A further small risk is that, backed into a corner by the troika, the new Irish government could demand that reforms agreed at the EU level on the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and European Stability Mechanism (ESM) be put to a referendum. In addition to worsening relations between Ireland and the EU, this could put the euro area in crisis if the reforms were not passed, which would be highly likely if a referendum were held. Economic policy will be largely dictated by the terms agreed by the Irish government and the EU, IMF and ECB in exchange for an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The government will be forced to implement a number of austerity measures and financial and structural reforms, which will be evaluated on a quarterly basis. The conditionality of the bail-out package aims to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2015 (the government says that it will meet this target by 2014), boost competitiveness (particularly in sheltered fields such as law and medicine) and repair the ailing banking system. The government guaranteed the main commercial banks' liabilities in 2008, and this guarantee was most recently extended in late 2010 to June 2011. As a result, private debt in Ireland has been largely backstopped by the state. We expect that the new government will impose a haircut on some unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland, but that the bank guarantee will continue to be largely honoured until mid-2013 at the earliest, when a European-wide permanent crisis mechanism is implemented to force private debt holders to bear some of the burden of over-indebtedness (see Fiscal policy, In focus). The government is also expected to focus on attracting foreign direct investment in 2011-15, although this is likely to be less centred on the quality of investment and more on encouraging any company that shows an interest in creating employment.As a precondition to the agreement on the EUR85bn rescue package, the Irish government pushed through a 2011 budget and agreed the National Recovery Plan 2011-14 designed to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. According to the 2011 budget, the government aims to generate EUR6bn in savings to reduce the budget deficit from an official estimate of 32% of GDP in 2010 (which includes an estimated EUR31bn-36bn bail-out for Anglo Irish Bank, Irish Nationwide Building Society and Educational Building Society) to 9.4% of GDP in 2011. The National Recovery Plan 2011-14 envisages a fiscal adjustment of EUR3.6bn in 2012, EUR3.1bn in 2013 and EUR3.1bn in 2014 to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. We expect the budget deficit to narrow from an estimated 32.2% of GDP in 2010 to 11.4% in 2011 and 8.7% in 2012. Our forecasts for the budget deficit are higher than the government's because they are predicated on lower growth figures (the government expects GDP to grow by an annual average of 1.8% in 2011-14, compared with our forecast of 0.7%). The budget deficit is forecast to fall to 2.5% of GDP by 2015, but this is partly owing to an expected restructuring of Irish sovereign debt when the EU/IMF lending facility expires in 2013.We forecast that public debt will rise from an estimated 96% of GDP in 2010 to 131% of GDP in 2012. The EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility is sufficiently large to cover Ireland's debt financing needs in 2011 and 2012. According to a report by the European Commission, however, Ireland is expected to return to the markets to raise funding from as early as 2012. We assume that borrowing costs for the Irish state will remain unsustainably high in 2012 and that the EU/IMF bail-out package for Ireland will be expanded to cover the country's funding costs through mid-2013. In 2013, we expect Ireland to be forced to restructure its sovereign debt through the ESM, and public debt will fall to 96% of GDP in 2013 and 86% of GDP by 2015.According to the IMF's deficit projections for Ireland in 2011-13 (10.8% of GDP in 2011, 8.9% of GDP in 2012 and 7.4% of GDP in 2013), the Irish government will need over EUR68bn to finance its deficit, long-term bond redemptions and promissory note payments. This exceeds the EUR50bn funding that is earmarked for the government under the EU/IMF bail-out. The European Commission acknowledged this funding shortfall in a report in February 2010, in which it said that the Irish state will have to begin raising funding in the markets from 2012. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects borrowing costs for the Irish state to remain prohibitively high in 2012, and we therefore do not think the government will be able to raise funding in the markets. Furthermore, the Greek EU/IMF bail-out will also run out in 2012. It is unlikely that the EU and IMF would risk having both countries attempt to return to the markets next year and fail. Instead, we expect that Ireland and Greece will be granted access to more official funding from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to meet their funding needs to mid-2013, when a permanent crisis mechanism-the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)-is due to be implemented. The ESM, which was discussed further by EU leaders in March 2011, is likely to include a financial facility for advancing loans to countries at risk of default (with strict policy conditions) and an insolvency procedure for countries unable to service debt, including a requirement for private creditors to share any haircuts. We expect that Ireland will restructure its sovereign debt under the ESM in 2013. Our belief is that a haircut of around 25% will be imposed on sovereign debt to reduce public debt to 96% of GDP. This should be sufficient for the government to begin reducing public debt levels.Both of the main opposition parties-Fine Gael and the Labour Party-have demanded that the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out be reduced. This has not yet occurred, even though the so-called "troika" of the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and IMF has reduced the interest rate on its bail-out facility for Greece. We expect that Ireland's interest rate will eventually be reduced by 1 percentage point, but it is unclear what concession the Irish government will have to make to secure this deal. Germany and France have indicated that they would like Ireland to raise its totemic low corporation tax in exchange for an interest-rate reduction. We expect that the Irish government would rather default on its debt than comply with this demand. Even if the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out fund is reduced, it could help to limit the ballooning of the state's overall debt-servicing costs in the medium to long term, but is on its own unlikely to return the state to solvency. Without considering the repayment of loans to the EU and IMF, Ireland already has too much overall debt, and reducing the interest rate for the bail-out does not address this problem.One of the conditions for gaining access to the EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility was that the Irish government must continue to guarantee senior bank debt. Fine Gael and the Labour Party have both spoken out against this, echoing widespread public sentiment against the bank guarantees. However, the new government announced after the banking stress test results were released that it would continue to backstop unsecured, unguaranteed Irish bank debt. Without any concessions on the terms of the Irish bail-out and with its popularity falling as the government implements austerity measures and continues to protect bondholders, the coalition may feel pushed into a corner by the troika. Consequently, there is a risk the government will yield to widespread public demands to threaten a unilateral withdrawal of the bank guarantee. However, given its dependence on EU support, Ireland does not stand to benefit from such a gambit. Ireland would lose access to the EU/IMF bail-out package and its banks could be cut off from the ECB emergency facilities that are currently propping up the Irish banking sector. Across-the-board senior bank debt defaults would leave the banks frozen out of the markets and trigger a run on deposits, which are already on a declining trend. As Ireland would have violated its agreement with the EU, Irish banks would struggle to issue senior debt again for years. Having just completely gone back on its word to uphold the terms of the EU/IMF bail-out and continue to protect senior bondholders, the government would also remain frozen out of the markets at a time when it is still running a primary deficit. Although it would shed its obligation to backstop private debt, the government would still run into serious funding problems and the public finances could become unsustainable. Finally, the new Irish government would be completely isolated in the EU if it were to revoke the bank guarantee unilaterally. Many other euro area countries have significant exposure to Irish bank debt, particularly Germany and France. Allowing Irish banks to default would probably necessitate bank recapitalisations in these other euro area countries. This would hardly win the new Irish government potential support in Brussels or other European capitals.Instead, the new government has a chance to avoid sovereign debt restructuring by getting the so-called troika to introduce bank debt write-downs incrementally, in a managed, orderly fashion. There is around EUR16.4bn in unsecured, unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland. If a drastic 50% haircut were imposed on this debt, the resultant EUR8.2bn in losses would probably not be large enough to spark a financial crisis in the euro area. The Irish government never promised to backstop this debt, so it would not be breaking a promise by imposing a haircut on it. The troika may therefore be willing to consider this proposition. Although the savings would not make much of a dent in Ireland's public finances, imposing a haircut on unguaranteed, unsecured senior bondholders could serve as an important release valve for public anger and frustration. This could benefit the new government by drawing a clear dividing line between it and its predecessor, giving the new government a clean slate from which to start the process of galvanising the public into facing the years of austerity and retrenchment ahead. This could also be in the EU's best interests, as it minimises the chances of mounting public hostility towards the EU and Ireland rejecting any treaty amendments necessary for reforms to the EU's bail-out mechanisms. Ireland has a precedent for voting down EU initiatives, having rejected both the Nice and Lisbon treaties.In its first weeks in office, the new government performed well, distinguishing itself from its tired and discredited predecessor with its energy and the political astuteness of some of its early decisions, such as cutting back sharply on ministerial staffing and transport costs. In Europe, the government displayed a new mood of confident engagement as it sought to negotiate changes to Ireland's bail-out agreement with the EU and IMF that had formed the core of Fine Gael and Labour election campaigns. There was a palpable lift in the public mood following the general election at the prospect of Irish interests being defended with increased vigour in European negotiations. Mr Kenny tapped into this mood most clearly in mid-March when he bluntly rejected the insistence of the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, that Ireland increase its 12.5% rate of corporation tax in return for a reduction in the cost of bail-out funding. The rate of decline of private consumption fell from 7% in 2009 to 1.2% in 2010, leaving household spending back at 2005 levels. In the final three months of 2010, private consumption only dropped by 0.4% quarter on quarter (seasonally adjusted). This is a better performance than might have been expected given a spate of adverse developments in that period: the labour market took a turn for the worse with unemployment jumping from 13.7% in the third quarter to 14.7% in the fourth; bail-out funding from the EU and IMF was sought, hitting confidence; and extreme weather conditions at the end of the year led to a slump in retail activity. Government consumption of goods and services fell by 2.2% in 2010.After contracting by 1.2% in 2010, we expect private consumption to fall by 3.3% in 2011 and by 1.3% in 2012 before stagnating in 2013 and returning to moderate growth in 2014-15. Rising unemployment, severe cuts of 5-20% in public-sector wages (after similar cuts experienced by some in the private sector), large tax rises and the negative wealth effect of lower house prices are likely to constrain consumer demand severely, particularly in the first half of the forecast period. Furthermore, Irish households are highly indebted. Private consumption will therefore be constrained as households rebalance their balance sheets and as credit conditions remain tight in 2011-13. Investment will continue to shrink in 2012 as the collapse of the construction industry maintains momentum, before resuming moderate growth of 1.9% on average in 2013-15. Public spending will fall in 2011-12 as the government tries to control an exploding budget deficit, before returning to sluggish growth over the rest of the forecast period. There is a risk that the government will have to implement further austerity measures as it misses the budget deficit targets agreed with the EU and the IMF in exchange for access to an EUR85bn lending facility. There is also a risk that, if the expected debt restructuring is not managed smoothly in co-operation with the banks, the EU and the IMF, the Irish government could be frozen out of the markets for a number of years, with knock-on effects raising interest rates for consumers and businesses as well.The results of the bank stress tests announced on March 31st represented Ireland's fifth attempt to draw a line under the cost of the banking crisis, bringing to EUR70bn the total capital that has been committed to the banking sector since the crisis broke in 2008. These most recent stress tests reveal the complete failure of earlier attempts to assess the impairment of the banks' balance sheets. Of particular note is the fact that no serious provision had previously been made for losses on the banks' mortgage lending, despite a massive collapse in the residential property market that has been ongoing for some years. A much more rigorous assessment of the likely losses on this mortgage lending was a key element in the latest round of stress tests, contributing to total projected losses of EUR27.7bn in the four banks over three years. Moreover, estimated additional losses of EUR13.2bn will be generated over the same period as the banks comply with a requirement to sell off assets (totalling EUR72.6bn) in order to bring their loan-to-deposit ratios down to European averages of around 125%. The final capital shortfall of EUR24bn reflects these combined losses of EUR40.9bn reduced by a variety of offsetting factors, such as capital that has already been injected into the banks and loan loss provisions that have already been accounted for. Of the individual banks, Allied Irish Banks (AIB) was found to have the greatest capital shortfall, of EUR13.3bn, while Bank of Ireland required EUR5.2bn, Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) needed EUR4bn and Educational Building Society (EBS) EUR1.5bn.After a promising start in March, the government has already run into difficulty in its efforts to renegotiate Ireland's bail-out package with the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and the IMF (the so-called "troika"). This is likely to cause a sharp drop in public confidence in the government's ability to manage the economic crisis. With no concessions offered by the troika and with the government's popularity sinking, there is a risk that the new Irish government will push back against the troika. One way that this could be manifested is that the government could decide to impose haircuts on some senior bondholders. This could cause contagion in the euro zone, and would significantly damage Dublin's relations with the EU. A further small risk is that, backed into a corner by the troika, the new Irish government could demand that reforms agreed at the EU level on the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and European Stability Mechanism (ESM) be put to a referendum. In addition to worsening relations between Ireland and the EU, this could put the euro area in crisis if the reforms were not passed, which would be highly likely if a referendum were held. Short-term political stability is likely to remain weak in Ireland. The new government comprising Fine Gael and the Labour Party has a comfortable majority in parliament, but must weather many daunting challenges to ensure its survival. There are important policy differences between the two parties, one being the composition of the fiscal adjustment to be made in 2011-14. The coalition's room for manoeuvre will be severely constrained by the demanding terms of the EU/IMF lending facility agreement. Furthermore, the Economist Intelligence Unit expects that Ireland will restructure its debt in 2013 with the full support of banks (especially in other EU countries with exposure to the Irish banking sector), the EU and IMF. However, banking or sovereign default in Ireland before 2013 remain a possibility (see Fiscal policy, In focus). Against this difficult backdrop, public anger is likely to be a more prominent feature of Irish politics over the forecast period than has previously been the case, which we expect Sinn Fein to exploit. Sinn Fein has more than tripled its seats in parliament in the latest election, but the party is not a viable candidate for government. The opposition in Ireland is weak and fragmented, with Fianna Fail and the Green Party having suffered massive losses at the election. With a ruling coalition that has its hands tied by the EU and IMF and no realistic opposition parties, the electorate will be unable to vote for significant change within the Irish domestic political system. Tired of years of austerity and angry with the EU and the European Central Bank (ECB) for encroaching on Ireland's sovereignty, voters could express their frustration by turning against the euro.Economic policy will be largely dictated by the terms agreed by the Irish government and the EU, IMF and ECB in exchange for an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The government will be forced to implement a number of austerity measures and financial and structural reforms, which will be evaluated on a quarterly basis. The conditionality of the bail-out package aims to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2015 (the government says that it will meet this target by 2014), boost competitiveness (particularly in sheltered fields such as law and medicine) and repair the ailing banking system. The government guaranteed the main commercial banks' liabilities in 2008, and this guarantee was most recently extended in late 2010 to June 2011. As a result, private debt in Ireland has been largely backstopped by the state. We expect that the new government will impose a haircut on some unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland, but that the bank guarantee will continue to be largely honoured until mid-2013 at the earliest, when a European-wide permanent crisis mechanism is implemented to force private debt holders to bear some of the burden of over-indebtedness (see Fiscal policy, In focus). The government is also expected to focus on attracting foreign direct investment in 2011-15, although this is likely to be less centred on the quality of investment and more on encouraging any company that shows an interest in creating employment.As a precondition to the agreement on the EUR85bn rescue package, the Irish government pushed through a 2011 budget and agreed the National Recovery Plan 2011-14 designed to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. According to the 2011 budget, the government aims to generate EUR6bn in savings to reduce the budget deficit from an official estimate of 32% of GDP in 2010 (which includes an estimated EUR31bn-36bn bail-out for Anglo Irish Bank, Irish Nationwide Building Society and Educational Building Society) to 9.4% of GDP in 2011. The National Recovery Plan 2011-14 envisages a fiscal adjustment of EUR3.6bn in 2012, EUR3.1bn in 2013 and EUR3.1bn in 2014 to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. We expect the budget deficit to narrow from an estimated 32.2% of GDP in 2010 to 11.4% in 2011 and 8.7% in 2012. Our forecasts for the budget deficit are higher than the government's because they are predicated on lower growth figures (the government expects GDP to grow by an annual average of 1.8% in 2011-14, compared with our forecast of 0.7%). The budget deficit is forecast to fall to 2.5% of GDP by 2015, but this is partly owing to an expected restructuring of Irish sovereign debt when the EU/IMF lending facility expires in 2013.On November 28th 2010, the Irish government announced an EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility, with EUR50bn earmarked to alleviate the public finances and EUR30bn earmarked for recapitalising the ailing banking sector. The lending facility comes with an effective interest rate of 6%. With the Irish government guaranteeing most senior bank liabilities, the line between private and public debt in Ireland has become blurred. If a bank cannot honour its guaranteed senior debt, as would be likely given the poor state of the Irish banking sector, the government would have to step in to pay the bondholders. Eventually, this would result in unsustainable public finances. Although the EU/IMF lending facility successfully avoided imminent default on sovereign debt in the short term, it has probably only delayed public debt restructuring over the medium term. Both of the main opposition parties-Fine Gael and the Labour Party-have demanded that the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out be reduced. This has not yet occurred, even though the so-called "troika" of the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and IMF has reduced the interest rate on its bail-out facility for Greece. We expect that Ireland's interest rate will eventually be reduced by 1 percentage point, but it is unclear what concession the Irish government will have to make to secure this deal. Germany and France have indicated that they would like Ireland to raise its totemic low corporation tax in exchange for an interest-rate reduction. We expect that the Irish government would rather default on its debt than comply with this demand. Even if the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out fund is reduced, it could help to limit the ballooning of the state's overall debt-servicing costs in the medium to long term, but is on its own unlikely to return the state to solvency. Without considering the repayment of loans to the EU and IMF, Ireland already has too much overall debt, and reducing the interest rate for the bail-out does not address this problem.One of the conditions for gaining access to the EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility was that the Irish government must continue to guarantee senior bank debt. Fine Gael and the Labour Party have both spoken out against this, echoing widespread public sentiment against the bank guarantees. However, the new government announced after the banking stress test results were released that it would continue to backstop unsecured, unguaranteed Irish bank debt. Without any concessions on the terms of the Irish bail-out and with its popularity falling as the government implements austerity measures and continues to protect bondholders, the coalition may feel pushed into a corner by the troika. Consequently, there is a risk the government will yield to widespread public demands to threaten a unilateral withdrawal of the bank guarantee. However, given its dependence on EU support, Ireland does not stand to benefit from such a gambit. Ireland would lose access to the EU/IMF bail-out package and its banks could be cut off from the ECB emergency facilities that are currently propping up the Irish banking sector. Across-the-board senior bank debt defaults would leave the banks frozen out of the markets and trigger a run on deposits, which are already on a declining trend. As Ireland would have violated its agreement with the EU, Irish banks would struggle to issue senior debt again for years. Having just completely gone back on its word to uphold the terms of the EU/IMF bail-out and continue to protect senior bondholders, the government would also remain frozen out of the markets at a time when it is still running a primary deficit. Although it would shed its obligation to backstop private debt, the government would still run into serious funding problems and the public finances could become unsustainable. Finally, the new Irish government would be completely isolated in the EU if it were to revoke the bank guarantee unilaterally. Many other euro area countries have significant exposure to Irish bank debt, particularly Germany and France. Allowing Irish banks to default would probably necessitate bank recapitalisations in these other euro area countries. This would hardly win the new Irish government potential support in Brussels or other European capitals.Instead, the new government has a chance to avoid sovereign debt restructuring by getting the so-called troika to introduce bank debt write-downs incrementally, in a managed, orderly fashion. There is around EUR16.4bn in unsecured, unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland. If a drastic 50% haircut were imposed on this debt, the resultant EUR8.2bn in losses would probably not be large enough to spark a financial crisis in the euro area. The Irish government never promised to backstop this debt, so it would not be breaking a promise by imposing a haircut on it. The troika may therefore be willing to consider this proposition. Although the savings would not make much of a dent in Ireland's public finances, imposing a haircut on unguaranteed, unsecured senior bondholders could serve as an important release valve for public anger and frustration. This could benefit the new government by drawing a clear dividing line between it and its predecessor, giving the new government a clean slate from which to start the process of galvanising the public into facing the years of austerity and retrenchment ahead. This could also be in the EU's best interests, as it minimises the chances of mounting public hostility towards the EU and Ireland rejecting any treaty amendments necessary for reforms to the EU's bail-out mechanisms. Ireland has a precedent for voting down EU initiatives, having rejected both the Nice and Lisbon treaties.Beyond a haircut on unguaranteed bank debt, the new government could also begin discussions with the troika about imposing a haircut on guaranteed secured senior debt in the country's two failed banks: Anglo Irish Bank and Irish Nationwide Building Society. The troika may be willing to agree to this given how sick these two institutions are. If the new government manages to repeal the bank guarantee slowly and incrementally, it could succeed in reducing Ireland's overall debt levels and decoupling public and private debt. This would be the government's only realistic chance for avoiding a sovereign default in the medium term.On April 7th 2011 the ECB changed its refinancing rate for the first time since May 2009, moving it up by 25 basis points to 1.25%. This was in response to headline inflation in the euro area accelerating to above the ECB's target of close to but below 2% in the first quarter of 2011. While acknowledging that the rise is attributable to international oil and other commodity price increases, the ECB governing board is concerned about rising inflation expectations and second-round effects via wages. We expect another rise within the next three to six months. Our central forecast is that the ECB will raise its refinancing rate, but only gradually, to reach 2% by end-2012. We expect interest rates to rise further, to around 3% over 2013-14. These rate rises will not be appropriate for Ireland's macroeconomic conditions, as they will push up debt-servicing costs and could spark off a series of variable-rate mortgage defaults, which would further undermine the Irish banking system.Since mid-2010 the ECB has taken small steps to exit its policy of "enhanced credit easing", phasing out its unlimited one-year and six-month credit facilities, although liquidity support at shorter durations is likely to be maintained throughout 2011. The ECB would prefer to return to "fixed allotment" (auctioning funds to the highest bidder), but unless and until action is taken to restructure government debt, and recapitalise the banks, of weaker countries of the euro area, the ECB will probably be required to provide such support to the financial sector in these countries. The ECB also continues to make "sterilised" purchases of euro area government bonds and private-sector assets in secondary markets-worth around EUR77bn since May 2010-in order to keep peripheral bond yields in check. There is opposition in Germany to any open-ended commitment, but central bank support in some form can nevertheless be expected to continue for as long as liquidity and solvency concerns about euro area members persist. Unless economic conditions deteriorate severely overall, not just in weaker member states, we do not expect the ECB to adopt a deliberate policy of quantitative easing.After contracting by 1.2% in 2010, we expect private consumption to fall by 3.3% in 2011 and by 1.3% in 2012 before stagnating in 2013 and returning to moderate growth in 2014-15. Rising unemployment, severe cuts of 5-20% in public-sector wages (after similar cuts experienced by some in the private sector), large tax rises and the negative wealth effect of lower house prices are likely to constrain consumer demand severely, particularly in the first half of the forecast period. Furthermore, Irish households are highly indebted. Private consumption will therefore be constrained as households rebalance their balance sheets and as credit conditions remain tight in 2011-13. Investment will continue to shrink in 2012 as the collapse of the construction industry maintains momentum, before resuming moderate growth of 1.9% on average in 2013-15. Public spending will fall in 2011-12 as the government tries to control an exploding budget deficit, before returning to sluggish growth over the rest of the forecast period. There is a risk that the government will have to implement further austerity measures as it misses the budget deficit targets agreed with the EU and the IMF in exchange for access to an EUR85bn lending facility. There is also a risk that, if the expected debt restructuring is not managed smoothly in co-operation with the banks, the EU and the IMF, the Irish government could be frozen out of the markets for a number of years, with knock-on effects raising interest rates for consumers and businesses as well.The two parties that had participated in the outgoing government-Fianna Fail and the much smaller Green Party-were punished harshly by the electorate for their handling of the combined banking and fiscal crises that have seen the country pushed to the brink of insolvency. Fianna Fail recorded its worst result ever, with just 20 seats in parliament, making it a peripheral force for the first time in the history of the Irish state. The Green Party fared even worse, with its parliamentary presence wiped out entirely. Fianna Fail is joined on the opposition benches by the left-wing nationalist Sinn Fein party, as well as by a further 19 parliamentarians comprising smaller parties and independents. A swift period of negotiation between Fine Gael and Labour followed the election, which led to the publication of a programme for government on March 5th, four days before parliament reconvened and Mr Kenny's government was formally elected to office. Although the programme for government is a wide-ranging document, the profound crises in the banking sector and the public finances take precedence over all other considerations. This is reflected in a number of institutional changes that are likely to mark the beginning of an extensive process of reforming Ireland's economic policymaking systems. First, the Department of Finance has been split into two separate departments, each with cabinet-level representation. As expected, Michael Noonan (Fine Gael) is the new minister for finance, while Brendan Howlin (Labour) holds the new position of minister for public expenditure and reform. Second, a four-person Economic Management Council was established to drive the government's economic decision-making. The council consists of Mr Kenny, the Labour Party leader Eamon Gilmore (who is deputy prime minister as well as minister for foreign affairs and trade), Mr Noonan and Mr Howlin.However, this mood of optimism and novelty did not survive the government's first serious engagement with the banking crisis. On March 31st, when Mr Noonan announced the government's policy response to a series of banking stress tests, it was apparent that he had been rebuffed in Europe on a number of key objectives (see Economic policy). These reversals undermined the government's claims to have made a decisive break with the failed policies of the outgoing administration. If this leads to a lasting dip in the government's credibility, it will deprive it of valuable public goodwill during the prolonged period of retrenchment that still lies ahead. The biggest beneficiary would probably be Sinn Fein, which continues to argue for unilateral action to prevent Ireland's taxpayers from having to backstop the losses of the banking sector. 
Economic policy: Banking stress test results are released
On March 31st the government announced the results of stress tests conducted by a US asset management company, BlackRock (and overseen by Boston Consulting Group) on the country's four remaining viable banks: Bank of Ireland, Allied Irish Banks (AIB), Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) and Educational Building Society (EBS). According to the finance ministry, a further EUR24bn in capital injections is required for these banks in order to provide for potential further losses on their loan books and put significant additional capital buffers in place to restore market confidence.Irish bank stress test results and restructuringThe results of the bank stress tests announced on March 31st represented Ireland's fifth attempt to draw a line under the cost of the banking crisis, bringing to EUR70bn the total capital that has been committed to the banking sector since the crisis broke in 2008. These most recent stress tests reveal the complete failure of earlier attempts to assess the impairment of the banks' balance sheets. Of particular note is the fact that no serious provision had previously been made for losses on the banks' mortgage lending, despite a massive collapse in the residential property market that has been ongoing for some years. A much more rigorous assessment of the likely losses on this mortgage lending was a key element in the latest round of stress tests, contributing to total projected losses of EUR27.7bn in the four banks over three years. Moreover, estimated additional losses of EUR13.2bn will be generated over the same period as the banks comply with a requirement to sell off assets (totalling EUR72.6bn) in order to bring their loan-to-deposit ratios down to European averages of around 125%. The final capital shortfall of EUR24bn reflects these combined losses of EUR40.9bn reduced by a variety of offsetting factors, such as capital that has already been injected into the banks and loan loss provisions that have already been accounted for. Of the individual banks, Allied Irish Banks (AIB) was found to have the greatest capital shortfall, of EUR13.3bn, while Bank of Ireland required EUR5.2bn, Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) needed EUR4bn and Educational Building Society (EBS) EUR1.5bn.In addition to announcing the banks' increased capital requirements, on March 31st the government also outlined the way in which it intends to restructure the banking sector in order to place it on a more robust footing. Of the six main banks, two are already in the process of being wound up-Anglo Irish Bank and Irish Nationwide Building Society (INBS). Consequently, these banks were not included in the recent round of stress tests, but it is possible that further losses may be identified in a separate review of their finances. Of the remaining four banks, the government intends to create two new "pillar" banks to form the core of the sector. The healthier of these, in the first instance at least, will be Bank of Ireland. The second will be formed through a merger of AIB and EBS. It is not yet clear what will happen to IL&P; its banking arm may be merged into Bank of Ireland, but this would have to follow significant restructuring involving the sale of IL&P's profitable insurance operation to offset large projected mortgage losses on the banking side. It is almost inevitable that the government will own a majority stake in the restructured sector's two main banks. Bank of Ireland has thus far kept the government's stake to just 36%, but with its capital shortfall increasing following the recent stress tests, it is difficult to envisage how the bank will source enough private capital to prevent it slipping into majority government ownership. The other pillar bank will be entirely government owned. AIB was already 93% owned by the government prior to the latest surge in its capital requirements, while EBS had already been fully nationalised. In addition to a reduction in the number of banks in the market, the aggregate size of the Irish banking sector will also shrink considerably as the banks deleverage to meet a loan-to-deposit ratio target of 122.5% by 2013 (at the end of December 2010, Bank of Ireland, AIB and EBS had ratios of around 170%; IL&P's was 248%). The minister of finance, Michael Noonan, has also indicated that, once reconstituted, Ireland's banks will be much more domestically focused than was the case during their years of unsustainable expansion.The government's banking-related announcements were just as significant for what they omitted as for what they included. In particular, no mention was made of lowering the public cost of the crisis by imposing losses on the banks' unguaranteed senior bondholders. Nor did the European Central Bank (ECB) make an expected simultaneous move to create a medium-term lending facility for Irish banks, which would allow banks to wean themselves off at least some of the emergency short-term liquidity from the Central Bank of Ireland (CBI), on which they are now reliant. The first of these omissions represents a significant economic policy reversal for the government. During the general election campaign in February, both of the coalition parties made high-profile commitments to impose losses on unguaranteed senior bondholders, which the public widely supports. In office, however, they took the same line as the outgoing government, yielding to ECB concerns that haircuts on any Irish bank debt would lead to dangerous contagion across the wider European banking sector. The prospect of a new ECB facility for Ireland's banks was a less politically charged objective than the idea of burning bondholders, but poor expectations management meant that its absence compounded the sense that the new government had failed to make any significant economic policy advances. Of more fundamental concern in relation to the delay of an ECB medium-term facility is its confirmation that the euro area's response to Ireland's twin banking and sovereign debt crises remains a work in progress, which continues to be developed and implemented in a piecemeal fashion. Until the shape of the system-wide response to the crisis becomes clearer, there are limits to the extent to which purely domestic Irish reforms will rebuild investor confidence in the country's banks, or in the sovereign for that matter.Ireland's economy contracted for a third consecutive year in 2010, with GDP dropping by 1% year on year. This brings the cumulative contraction from the economy's peak in 2007 to 11.8%, following declines of 3.6% in 2008 and 7.6% in 2009. In addition to highlighting the continuing weakness of the real economy, national accounts data for 2010 also have potential knock-on effects for the process of repairing the country's banking sector and its public finances. First, the fall of 1% in real terms recorded for the year is greater than the 0.2% estimate that was used in the banking stress tests published on March 31st. This casts some doubt on whether the stress tests were based on sufficiently challenging macroeconomic assumptions. Second, nominal GDP decreased even more rapidly than real GDP, falling by 3.6%, to EUR153.9bn. This compares with a budget-day assumption of EUR157.3bn, leading to an upward revision of Ireland's debt/GDP ratio from an earlier estimate of 94.2% to 96.3% in 2010. Similarly, lower-than-expected levels of nominal GDP will increase the extent of the fiscal adjustment required in order to bring Ireland's deficit down to the EU target of 3% of GDP.Central Bank governorAccording to the IMF's deficit projections for Ireland in 2011-13 (10.8% of GDP in 2011, 8.9% of GDP in 2012 and 7.4% of GDP in 2013), the Irish government will need over EUR68bn to finance its deficit, long-term bond redemptions and promissory note payments. This exceeds the EUR50bn funding that is earmarked for the government under the EU/IMF bail-out. The European Commission acknowledged this funding shortfall in a report in February 2010, in which it said that the Irish state will have to begin raising funding in the markets from 2012. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects borrowing costs for the Irish state to remain prohibitively high in 2012, and we therefore do not think the government will be able to raise funding in the markets. Furthermore, the Greek EU/IMF bail-out will also run out in 2012. It is unlikely that the EU and IMF would risk having both countries attempt to return to the markets next year and fail. Instead, we expect that Ireland and Greece will be granted access to more official funding from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to meet their funding needs to mid-2013, when a permanent crisis mechanism-the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)-is due to be implemented. The ESM, which was discussed further by EU leaders in March 2011, is likely to include a financial facility for advancing loans to countries at risk of default (with strict policy conditions) and an insolvency procedure for countries unable to service debt, including a requirement for private creditors to share any haircuts. We expect that Ireland will restructure its sovereign debt under the ESM in 2013. Our belief is that a haircut of around 25% will be imposed on sovereign debt to reduce public debt to 96% of GDP. This should be sufficient for the government to begin reducing public debt levels.Since mid-2010 the ECB has taken small steps to exit its policy of "enhanced credit easing", phasing out its unlimited one-year and six-month credit facilities, although liquidity support at shorter durations is likely to be maintained throughout 2011. The ECB would prefer to return to "fixed allotment" (auctioning funds to the highest bidder), but unless and until action is taken to restructure government debt, and recapitalise the banks, of weaker countries of the euro area, the ECB will probably be required to provide such support to the financial sector in these countries. The ECB also continues to make "sterilised" purchases of euro area government bonds and private-sector assets in secondary markets-worth around EUR77bn since May 2010-in order to keep peripheral bond yields in check. There is opposition in Germany to any open-ended commitment, but central bank support in some form can nevertheless be expected to continue for as long as liquidity and solvency concerns about euro area members persist. Unless economic conditions deteriorate severely overall, not just in weaker member states, we do not expect the ECB to adopt a deliberate policy of quantitative easing.After contracting by 1.2% in 2010, we expect private consumption to fall by 3.3% in 2011 and by 1.3% in 2012 before stagnating in 2013 and returning to moderate growth in 2014-15. Rising unemployment, severe cuts of 5-20% in public-sector wages (after similar cuts experienced by some in the private sector), large tax rises and the negative wealth effect of lower house prices are likely to constrain consumer demand severely, particularly in the first half of the forecast period. Furthermore, Irish households are highly indebted. Private consumption will therefore be constrained as households rebalance their balance sheets and as credit conditions remain tight in 2011-13. Investment will continue to shrink in 2012 as the collapse of the construction industry maintains momentum, before resuming moderate growth of 1.9% on average in 2013-15. Public spending will fall in 2011-12 as the government tries to control an exploding budget deficit, before returning to sluggish growth over the rest of the forecast period. There is a risk that the government will have to implement further austerity measures as it misses the budget deficit targets agreed with the EU and the IMF in exchange for access to an EUR85bn lending facility. There is also a risk that, if the expected debt restructuring is not managed smoothly in co-operation with the banks, the EU and the IMF, the Irish government could be frozen out of the markets for a number of years, with knock-on effects raising interest rates for consumers and businesses as well.In its first weeks in office, the new government performed well, distinguishing itself from its tired and discredited predecessor with its energy and the political astuteness of some of its early decisions, such as cutting back sharply on ministerial staffing and transport costs. In Europe, the government displayed a new mood of confident engagement as it sought to negotiate changes to Ireland's bail-out agreement with the EU and IMF that had formed the core of Fine Gael and Labour election campaigns. There was a palpable lift in the public mood following the general election at the prospect of Irish interests being defended with increased vigour in European negotiations. Mr Kenny tapped into this mood most clearly in mid-March when he bluntly rejected the insistence of the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, that Ireland increase its 12.5% rate of corporation tax in return for a reduction in the cost of bail-out funding. Short-term political stability is likely to remain weak in Ireland. The new government comprising Fine Gael and the Labour Party has a comfortable majority in parliament, but must weather many daunting challenges to ensure its survival. There are important policy differences between the two parties, one being the composition of the fiscal adjustment to be made in 2011-14. The coalition's room for manoeuvre will be severely constrained by the demanding terms of the EU/IMF lending facility agreement. Furthermore, the Economist Intelligence Unit expects that Ireland will restructure its debt in 2013 with the full support of banks (especially in other EU countries with exposure to the Irish banking sector), the EU and IMF. However, banking or sovereign default in Ireland before 2013 remain a possibility (see Fiscal policy, In focus). On November 28th 2010, the Irish government announced an EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility, with EUR50bn earmarked to alleviate the public finances and EUR30bn earmarked for recapitalising the ailing banking sector. The lending facility comes with an effective interest rate of 6%. With the Irish government guaranteeing most senior bank liabilities, the line between private and public debt in Ireland has become blurred. If a bank cannot honour its guaranteed senior debt, as would be likely given the poor state of the Irish banking sector, the government would have to step in to pay the bondholders. Eventually, this would result in unsustainable public finances. Although the EU/IMF lending facility successfully avoided imminent default on sovereign debt in the short term, it has probably only delayed public debt restructuring over the medium term. According to the IMF's deficit projections for Ireland in 2011-13 (10.8% of GDP in 2011, 8.9% of GDP in 2012 and 7.4% of GDP in 2013), the Irish government will need over EUR68bn to finance its deficit, long-term bond redemptions and promissory note payments. This exceeds the EUR50bn funding that is earmarked for the government under the EU/IMF bail-out. The European Commission acknowledged this funding shortfall in a report in February 2010, in which it said that the Irish state will have to begin raising funding in the markets from 2012. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects borrowing costs for the Irish state to remain prohibitively high in 2012, and we therefore do not think the government will be able to raise funding in the markets. Furthermore, the Greek EU/IMF bail-out will also run out in 2012. It is unlikely that the EU and IMF would risk having both countries attempt to return to the markets next year and fail. Instead, we expect that Ireland and Greece will be granted access to more official funding from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to meet their funding needs to mid-2013, when a permanent crisis mechanism-the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)-is due to be implemented. The ESM, which was discussed further by EU leaders in March 2011, is likely to include a financial facility for advancing loans to countries at risk of default (with strict policy conditions) and an insolvency procedure for countries unable to service debt, including a requirement for private creditors to share any haircuts. We expect that Ireland will restructure its sovereign debt under the ESM in 2013. Our belief is that a haircut of around 25% will be imposed on sovereign debt to reduce public debt to 96% of GDP. This should be sufficient for the government to begin reducing public debt levels.Both of the main opposition parties-Fine Gael and the Labour Party-have demanded that the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out be reduced. This has not yet occurred, even though the so-called "troika" of the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and IMF has reduced the interest rate on its bail-out facility for Greece. We expect that Ireland's interest rate will eventually be reduced by 1 percentage point, but it is unclear what concession the Irish government will have to make to secure this deal. Germany and France have indicated that they would like Ireland to raise its totemic low corporation tax in exchange for an interest-rate reduction. We expect that the Irish government would rather default on its debt than comply with this demand. Even if the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out fund is reduced, it could help to limit the ballooning of the state's overall debt-servicing costs in the medium to long term, but is on its own unlikely to return the state to solvency. Without considering the repayment of loans to the EU and IMF, Ireland already has too much overall debt, and reducing the interest rate for the bail-out does not address this problem.One of the conditions for gaining access to the EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility was that the Irish government must continue to guarantee senior bank debt. Fine Gael and the Labour Party have both spoken out against this, echoing widespread public sentiment against the bank guarantees. However, the new government announced after the banking stress test results were released that it would continue to backstop unsecured, unguaranteed Irish bank debt. Without any concessions on the terms of the Irish bail-out and with its popularity falling as the government implements austerity measures and continues to protect bondholders, the coalition may feel pushed into a corner by the troika. Consequently, there is a risk the government will yield to widespread public demands to threaten a unilateral withdrawal of the bank guarantee. However, given its dependence on EU support, Ireland does not stand to benefit from such a gambit. Ireland would lose access to the EU/IMF bail-out package and its banks could be cut off from the ECB emergency facilities that are currently propping up the Irish banking sector. Across-the-board senior bank debt defaults would leave the banks frozen out of the markets and trigger a run on deposits, which are already on a declining trend. As Ireland would have violated its agreement with the EU, Irish banks would struggle to issue senior debt again for years. Having just completely gone back on its word to uphold the terms of the EU/IMF bail-out and continue to protect senior bondholders, the government would also remain frozen out of the markets at a time when it is still running a primary deficit. Although it would shed its obligation to backstop private debt, the government would still run into serious funding problems and the public finances could become unsustainable. Finally, the new Irish government would be completely isolated in the EU if it were to revoke the bank guarantee unilaterally. Many other euro area countries have significant exposure to Irish bank debt, particularly Germany and France. Allowing Irish banks to default would probably necessitate bank recapitalisations in these other euro area countries. This would hardly win the new Irish government potential support in Brussels or other European capitals.Beyond a haircut on unguaranteed bank debt, the new government could also begin discussions with the troika about imposing a haircut on guaranteed secured senior debt in the country's two failed banks: Anglo Irish Bank and Irish Nationwide Building Society. The troika may be willing to agree to this given how sick these two institutions are. If the new government manages to repeal the bank guarantee slowly and incrementally, it could succeed in reducing Ireland's overall debt levels and decoupling public and private debt. This would be the government's only realistic chance for avoiding a sovereign default in the medium term.On April 7th 2011 the ECB changed its refinancing rate for the first time since May 2009, moving it up by 25 basis points to 1.25%. This was in response to headline inflation in the euro area accelerating to above the ECB's target of close to but below 2% in the first quarter of 2011. While acknowledging that the rise is attributable to international oil and other commodity price increases, the ECB governing board is concerned about rising inflation expectations and second-round effects via wages. We expect another rise within the next three to six months. Our central forecast is that the ECB will raise its refinancing rate, but only gradually, to reach 2% by end-2012. We expect interest rates to rise further, to around 3% over 2013-14. These rate rises will not be appropriate for Ireland's macroeconomic conditions, as they will push up debt-servicing costs and could spark off a series of variable-rate mortgage defaults, which would further undermine the Irish banking system.After a promising start in March, the government has already run into difficulty in its efforts to renegotiate Ireland's bail-out package with the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and the IMF (the so-called "troika"). This is likely to cause a sharp drop in public confidence in the government's ability to manage the economic crisis. With no concessions offered by the troika and with the government's popularity sinking, there is a risk that the new Irish government will push back against the troika. One way that this could be manifested is that the government could decide to impose haircuts on some senior bondholders. This could cause contagion in the euro zone, and would significantly damage Dublin's relations with the EU. A further small risk is that, backed into a corner by the troika, the new Irish government could demand that reforms agreed at the EU level on the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and European Stability Mechanism (ESM) be put to a referendum. In addition to worsening relations between Ireland and the EU, this could put the euro area in crisis if the reforms were not passed, which would be highly likely if a referendum were held. In the longer term, Ireland's political institutions may undergo major reform. Because the electoral system has multi-member constituencies, competition within constituencies is fierce. As a result, many politicians spend the majority of their time focused on constituency issues rather than on national politics. Single-member constituencies would help to reverse this, as would increasing the competencies of local government to address some of the concerns currently tackled by members of parliament. Fine Gael has been more in favour of widespread political reform than the other main parties, but it remains to be seen whether the new government will have the political will, time or energy to embark on a programme of comprehensive political reform in the midst of a fiscal and financial crisis.On November 28th 2010 the Irish government, EU, ECB and IMF announced the terms of an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The bulk of external funding came from the IMF, EFSF and the European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM), but bilateral loans were also offered by the UK, Sweden and Denmark. Ireland is vociferously protective of its sovereignty, and there is (and will continue to be) widespread public outrage that the EU and IMF will be dictating economic policy for many years to come and that Ireland was forced to rely on the UK, its previous colonial ruler, for funding.Economic policy will be largely dictated by the terms agreed by the Irish government and the EU, IMF and ECB in exchange for an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The government will be forced to implement a number of austerity measures and financial and structural reforms, which will be evaluated on a quarterly basis. The conditionality of the bail-out package aims to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2015 (the government says that it will meet this target by 2014), boost competitiveness (particularly in sheltered fields such as law and medicine) and repair the ailing banking system. The government guaranteed the main commercial banks' liabilities in 2008, and this guarantee was most recently extended in late 2010 to June 2011. As a result, private debt in Ireland has been largely backstopped by the state. We expect that the new government will impose a haircut on some unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland, but that the bank guarantee will continue to be largely honoured until mid-2013 at the earliest, when a European-wide permanent crisis mechanism is implemented to force private debt holders to bear some of the burden of over-indebtedness (see Fiscal policy, In focus). The government is also expected to focus on attracting foreign direct investment in 2011-15, although this is likely to be less centred on the quality of investment and more on encouraging any company that shows an interest in creating employment.According to the IMF's deficit projections for Ireland in 2011-13 (10.8% of GDP in 2011, 8.9% of GDP in 2012 and 7.4% of GDP in 2013), the Irish government will need over EUR68bn to finance its deficit, long-term bond redemptions and promissory note payments. This exceeds the EUR50bn funding that is earmarked for the government under the EU/IMF bail-out. The European Commission acknowledged this funding shortfall in a report in February 2010, in which it said that the Irish state will have to begin raising funding in the markets from 2012. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects borrowing costs for the Irish state to remain prohibitively high in 2012, and we therefore do not think the government will be able to raise funding in the markets. Furthermore, the Greek EU/IMF bail-out will also run out in 2012. It is unlikely that the EU and IMF would risk having both countries attempt to return to the markets next year and fail. Instead, we expect that Ireland and Greece will be granted access to more official funding from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to meet their funding needs to mid-2013, when a permanent crisis mechanism-the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)-is due to be implemented. The ESM, which was discussed further by EU leaders in March 2011, is likely to include a financial facility for advancing loans to countries at risk of default (with strict policy conditions) and an insolvency procedure for countries unable to service debt, including a requirement for private creditors to share any haircuts. We expect that Ireland will restructure its sovereign debt under the ESM in 2013. Our belief is that a haircut of around 25% will be imposed on sovereign debt to reduce public debt to 96% of GDP. This should be sufficient for the government to begin reducing public debt levels.Instead, the new government has a chance to avoid sovereign debt restructuring by getting the so-called troika to introduce bank debt write-downs incrementally, in a managed, orderly fashion. There is around EUR16.4bn in unsecured, unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland. If a drastic 50% haircut were imposed on this debt, the resultant EUR8.2bn in losses would probably not be large enough to spark a financial crisis in the euro area. The Irish government never promised to backstop this debt, so it would not be breaking a promise by imposing a haircut on it. The troika may therefore be willing to consider this proposition. Although the savings would not make much of a dent in Ireland's public finances, imposing a haircut on unguaranteed, unsecured senior bondholders could serve as an important release valve for public anger and frustration. This could benefit the new government by drawing a clear dividing line between it and its predecessor, giving the new government a clean slate from which to start the process of galvanising the public into facing the years of austerity and retrenchment ahead. This could also be in the EU's best interests, as it minimises the chances of mounting public hostility towards the EU and Ireland rejecting any treaty amendments necessary for reforms to the EU's bail-out mechanisms. Ireland has a precedent for voting down EU initiatives, having rejected both the Nice and Lisbon treaties.Since mid-2010 the ECB has taken small steps to exit its policy of "enhanced credit easing", phasing out its unlimited one-year and six-month credit facilities, although liquidity support at shorter durations is likely to be maintained throughout 2011. The ECB would prefer to return to "fixed allotment" (auctioning funds to the highest bidder), but unless and until action is taken to restructure government debt, and recapitalise the banks, of weaker countries of the euro area, the ECB will probably be required to provide such support to the financial sector in these countries. The ECB also continues to make "sterilised" purchases of euro area government bonds and private-sector assets in secondary markets-worth around EUR77bn since May 2010-in order to keep peripheral bond yields in check. There is opposition in Germany to any open-ended commitment, but central bank support in some form can nevertheless be expected to continue for as long as liquidity and solvency concerns about euro area members persist. Unless economic conditions deteriorate severely overall, not just in weaker member states, we do not expect the ECB to adopt a deliberate policy of quantitative easing.Short-term political stability is likely to remain weak in Ireland. The new government comprising Fine Gael and the Labour Party has a comfortable majority in parliament, but must weather many daunting challenges to ensure its survival. There are important policy differences between the two parties, one being the composition of the fiscal adjustment to be made in 2011-14. The coalition's room for manoeuvre will be severely constrained by the demanding terms of the EU/IMF lending facility agreement. Furthermore, the Economist Intelligence Unit expects that Ireland will restructure its debt in 2013 with the full support of banks (especially in other EU countries with exposure to the Irish banking sector), the EU and IMF. However, banking or sovereign default in Ireland before 2013 remain a possibility (see Fiscal policy, In focus). On November 28th 2010 the Irish government, EU, ECB and IMF announced the terms of an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The bulk of external funding came from the IMF, EFSF and the European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM), but bilateral loans were also offered by the UK, Sweden and Denmark. Ireland is vociferously protective of its sovereignty, and there is (and will continue to be) widespread public outrage that the EU and IMF will be dictating economic policy for many years to come and that Ireland was forced to rely on the UK, its previous colonial ruler, for funding.Economic policy will be largely dictated by the terms agreed by the Irish government and the EU, IMF and ECB in exchange for an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The government will be forced to implement a number of austerity measures and financial and structural reforms, which will be evaluated on a quarterly basis. The conditionality of the bail-out package aims to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2015 (the government says that it will meet this target by 2014), boost competitiveness (particularly in sheltered fields such as law and medicine) and repair the ailing banking system. The government guaranteed the main commercial banks' liabilities in 2008, and this guarantee was most recently extended in late 2010 to June 2011. As a result, private debt in Ireland has been largely backstopped by the state. We expect that the new government will impose a haircut on some unguaranteed senior bank debt in Ireland, but that the bank guarantee will continue to be largely honoured until mid-2013 at the earliest, when a European-wide permanent crisis mechanism is implemented to force private debt holders to bear some of the burden of over-indebtedness (see Fiscal policy, In focus). The government is also expected to focus on attracting foreign direct investment in 2011-15, although this is likely to be less centred on the quality of investment and more on encouraging any company that shows an interest in creating employment.As a precondition to the agreement on the EUR85bn rescue package, the Irish government pushed through a 2011 budget and agreed the National Recovery Plan 2011-14 designed to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. According to the 2011 budget, the government aims to generate EUR6bn in savings to reduce the budget deficit from an official estimate of 32% of GDP in 2010 (which includes an estimated EUR31bn-36bn bail-out for Anglo Irish Bank, Irish Nationwide Building Society and Educational Building Society) to 9.4% of GDP in 2011. The National Recovery Plan 2011-14 envisages a fiscal adjustment of EUR3.6bn in 2012, EUR3.1bn in 2013 and EUR3.1bn in 2014 to reduce the budget deficit below 3% of GDP by 2014. We expect the budget deficit to narrow from an estimated 32.2% of GDP in 2010 to 11.4% in 2011 and 8.7% in 2012. Our forecasts for the budget deficit are higher than the government's because they are predicated on lower growth figures (the government expects GDP to grow by an annual average of 1.8% in 2011-14, compared with our forecast of 0.7%). The budget deficit is forecast to fall to 2.5% of GDP by 2015, but this is partly owing to an expected restructuring of Irish sovereign debt when the EU/IMF lending facility expires in 2013.We forecast that public debt will rise from an estimated 96% of GDP in 2010 to 131% of GDP in 2012. The EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility is sufficiently large to cover Ireland's debt financing needs in 2011 and 2012. According to a report by the European Commission, however, Ireland is expected to return to the markets to raise funding from as early as 2012. We assume that borrowing costs for the Irish state will remain unsustainably high in 2012 and that the EU/IMF bail-out package for Ireland will be expanded to cover the country's funding costs through mid-2013. In 2013, we expect Ireland to be forced to restructure its sovereign debt through the ESM, and public debt will fall to 96% of GDP in 2013 and 86% of GDP by 2015.EU/IMF lending facility probably only delays sovereign debt restructuringOn November 28th 2010, the Irish government announced an EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility, with EUR50bn earmarked to alleviate the public finances and EUR30bn earmarked for recapitalising the ailing banking sector. The lending facility comes with an effective interest rate of 6%. With the Irish government guaranteeing most senior bank liabilities, the line between private and public debt in Ireland has become blurred. If a bank cannot honour its guaranteed senior debt, as would be likely given the poor state of the Irish banking sector, the government would have to step in to pay the bondholders. Eventually, this would result in unsustainable public finances. Although the EU/IMF lending facility successfully avoided imminent default on sovereign debt in the short term, it has probably only delayed public debt restructuring over the medium term. One of the conditions for gaining access to the EUR85bn EU/IMF lending facility was that the Irish government must continue to guarantee senior bank debt. Fine Gael and the Labour Party have both spoken out against this, echoing widespread public sentiment against the bank guarantees. However, the new government announced after the banking stress test results were released that it would continue to backstop unsecured, unguaranteed Irish bank debt. Without any concessions on the terms of the Irish bail-out and with its popularity falling as the government implements austerity measures and continues to protect bondholders, the coalition may feel pushed into a corner by the troika. Consequently, there is a risk the government will yield to widespread public demands to threaten a unilateral withdrawal of the bank guarantee. However, given its dependence on EU support, Ireland does not stand to benefit from such a gambit. Ireland would lose access to the EU/IMF bail-out package and its banks could be cut off from the ECB emergency facilities that are currently propping up the Irish banking sector. Across-the-board senior bank debt defaults would leave the banks frozen out of the markets and trigger a run on deposits, which are already on a declining trend. As Ireland would have violated its agreement with the EU, Irish banks would struggle to issue senior debt again for years. Having just completely gone back on its word to uphold the terms of the EU/IMF bail-out and continue to protect senior bondholders, the government would also remain frozen out of the markets at a time when it is still running a primary deficit. Although it would shed its obligation to backstop private debt, the government would still run into serious funding problems and the public finances could become unsustainable. Finally, the new Irish government would be completely isolated in the EU if it were to revoke the bank guarantee unilaterally. Many other euro area countries have significant exposure to Irish bank debt, particularly Germany and France. Allowing Irish banks to default would probably necessitate bank recapitalisations in these other euro area countries. This would hardly win the new Irish government potential support in Brussels or other European capitals.After contracting by 1.2% in 2010, we expect private consumption to fall by 3.3% in 2011 and by 1.3% in 2012 before stagnating in 2013 and returning to moderate growth in 2014-15. Rising unemployment, severe cuts of 5-20% in public-sector wages (after similar cuts experienced by some in the private sector), large tax rises and the negative wealth effect of lower house prices are likely to constrain consumer demand severely, particularly in the first half of the forecast period. Furthermore, Irish households are highly indebted. Private consumption will therefore be constrained as households rebalance their balance sheets and as credit conditions remain tight in 2011-13. Investment will continue to shrink in 2012 as the collapse of the construction industry maintains momentum, before resuming moderate growth of 1.9% on average in 2013-15. Public spending will fall in 2011-12 as the government tries to control an exploding budget deficit, before returning to sluggish growth over the rest of the forecast period. There is a risk that the government will have to implement further austerity measures as it misses the budget deficit targets agreed with the EU and the IMF in exchange for access to an EUR85bn lending facility. There is also a risk that, if the expected debt restructuring is not managed smoothly in co-operation with the banks, the EU and the IMF, the Irish government could be frozen out of the markets for a number of years, with knock-on effects raising interest rates for consumers and businesses as well.The results of the bank stress tests announced on March 31st represented Ireland's fifth attempt to draw a line under the cost of the banking crisis, bringing to EUR70bn the total capital that has been committed to the banking sector since the crisis broke in 2008. These most recent stress tests reveal the complete failure of earlier attempts to assess the impairment of the banks' balance sheets. Of particular note is the fact that no serious provision had previously been made for losses on the banks' mortgage lending, despite a massive collapse in the residential property market that has been ongoing for some years. A much more rigorous assessment of the likely losses on this mortgage lending was a key element in the latest round of stress tests, contributing to total projected losses of EUR27.7bn in the four banks over three years. Moreover, estimated additional losses of EUR13.2bn will be generated over the same period as the banks comply with a requirement to sell off assets (totalling EUR72.6bn) in order to bring their loan-to-deposit ratios down to European averages of around 125%. The final capital shortfall of EUR24bn reflects these combined losses of EUR40.9bn reduced by a variety of offsetting factors, such as capital that has already been injected into the banks and loan loss provisions that have already been accounted for. Of the individual banks, Allied Irish Banks (AIB) was found to have the greatest capital shortfall, of EUR13.3bn, while Bank of Ireland required EUR5.2bn, Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) needed EUR4bn and Educational Building Society (EBS) EUR1.5bn.The government's banking-related announcements were just as significant for what they omitted as for what they included. In particular, no mention was made of lowering the public cost of the crisis by imposing losses on the banks' unguaranteed senior bondholders. Nor did the European Central Bank (ECB) make an expected simultaneous move to create a medium-term lending facility for Irish banks, which would allow banks to wean themselves off at least some of the emergency short-term liquidity from the Central Bank of Ireland (CBI), on which they are now reliant. The first of these omissions represents a significant economic policy reversal for the government. During the general election campaign in February, both of the coalition parties made high-profile commitments to impose losses on unguaranteed senior bondholders, which the public widely supports. In office, however, they took the same line as the outgoing government, yielding to ECB concerns that haircuts on any Irish bank debt would lead to dangerous contagion across the wider European banking sector. The prospect of a new ECB facility for Ireland's banks was a less politically charged objective than the idea of burning bondholders, but poor expectations management meant that its absence compounded the sense that the new government had failed to make any significant economic policy advances. Of more fundamental concern in relation to the delay of an ECB medium-term facility is its confirmation that the euro area's response to Ireland's twin banking and sovereign debt crises remains a work in progress, which continues to be developed and implemented in a piecemeal fashion. Until the shape of the system-wide response to the crisis becomes clearer, there are limits to the extent to which purely domestic Irish reforms will rebuild investor confidence in the country's banks, or in the sovereign for that matter.On November 28th 2010 the Irish government, EU, ECB and IMF announced the terms of an EUR85bn lending facility for Ireland. The bulk of external funding came from the IMF, EFSF and the European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM), but bilateral loans were also offered by the UK, Sweden and Denmark. Ireland is vociferously protective of its sovereignty, and there is (and will continue to be) widespread public outrage that the EU and IMF will be dictating economic policy for many years to come and that Ireland was forced to rely on the UK, its previous colonial ruler, for funding.According to the IMF's deficit projections for Ireland in 2011-13 (10.8% of GDP in 2011, 8.9% of GDP in 2012 and 7.4% of GDP in 2013), the Irish government will need over EUR68bn to finance its deficit, long-term bond redemptions and promissory note payments. This exceeds the EUR50bn funding that is earmarked for the government under the EU/IMF bail-out. The European Commission acknowledged this funding shortfall in a report in February 2010, in which it said that the Irish state will have to begin raising funding in the markets from 2012. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects borrowing costs for the Irish state to remain prohibitively high in 2012, and we therefore do not think the government will be able to raise funding in the markets. Furthermore, the Greek EU/IMF bail-out will also run out in 2012. It is unlikely that the EU and IMF would risk having both countries attempt to return to the markets next year and fail. Instead, we expect that Ireland and Greece will be granted access to more official funding from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to meet their funding needs to mid-2013, when a permanent crisis mechanism-the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)-is due to be implemented. The ESM, which was discussed further by EU leaders in March 2011, is likely to include a financial facility for advancing loans to countries at risk of default (with strict policy conditions) and an insolvency procedure for countries unable to service debt, including a requirement for private creditors to share any haircuts. We expect that Ireland will restructure its sovereign debt under the ESM in 2013. Our belief is that a haircut of around 25% will be imposed on sovereign debt to reduce public debt to 96% of GDP. This should be sufficient for the government to begin reducing public debt levels.Both of the main opposition parties-Fine Gael and the Labour Party-have demanded that the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out be reduced. This has not yet occurred, even though the so-called "troika" of the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB) and IMF has reduced the interest rate on its bail-out facility for Greece. We expect that Ireland's interest rate will eventually be reduced by 1 percentage point, but it is unclear what concession the Irish government will have to make to secure this deal. Germany and France have indicated that they would like Ireland to raise its totemic low corporation tax in exchange for an interest-rate reduction. We expect that the Irish government would rather default on its debt than comply with this demand. Even if the interest rate on Ireland's bail-out fund is reduced, it could help to limit the ballooning of the state's overall debt-servicing costs in the medium to long term, but is on its own unlikely to return the state to solvency. Without considering the repayment of loans to the EU and IMF, Ireland already has too much overall debt, and reducing the interest rate for the bail-out does not address this problem.On March 31st the government announced the results of stress tests conducted by a US asset management company, BlackRock (and overseen by Boston Consulting Group) on the country's four remaining viable banks: Bank of Ireland, Allied Irish Banks (AIB), Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) and Educational Building Society (EBS). According to the finance ministry, a further EUR24bn in capital injections is required for these banks in order to provide for potential further losses on their loan books and put significant additional capital buffers in place to restore market confidence.The results of the bank stress tests announced on March 31st represented Ireland's fifth attempt to draw a line under the cost of the banking crisis, bringing to EUR70bn the total capital that has been committed to the banking sector since the crisis broke in 2008. These most recent stress tests reveal the complete failure of earlier attempts to assess the impairment of the banks' balance sheets. Of particular note is the fact that no serious provision had previously been made for losses on the banks' mortgage lending, despite a massive collapse in the residential property market that has been ongoing for some years. A much more rigorous assessment of the likely losses on this mortgage lending was a key element in the latest round of stress tests, contributing to total projected losses of EUR27.7bn in the four banks over three years. Moreover, estimated additional losses of EUR13.2bn will be generated over the same period as the banks comply with a requirement to sell off assets (totalling EUR72.6bn) in order to bring their loan-to-deposit ratios down to European averages of around 125%. The final capital shortfall of EUR24bn reflects these combined losses of EUR40.9bn reduced by a variety of offsetting factors, such as capital that has already been injected into the banks and loan loss provisions that have already been accounted for. Of the individual banks, Allied Irish Banks (AIB) was found to have the greatest capital shortfall, of EUR13.3bn, while Bank of Ireland required EUR5.2bn, Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) needed EUR4bn and Educational Building Society (EBS) EUR1.5bn.It is almost inevitable that the government will own a majority stake in the restructured sector's two main banks. Bank of Ireland has thus far kept the government's stake to just 36%, but with its capital shortfall increasing following the recent stress tests, it is difficult to envisage how the bank will source enough private capital to prevent it slipping into majority government ownership. The other pillar bank will be entirely government owned. AIB was already 93% owned by the government prior to the latest surge in its capital requirements, while EBS had already been fully nationalised. In addition to a reduction in the number of banks in the market, the aggregate size of the Irish banking sector will also shrink considerably as the banks deleverage to meet a loan-to-deposit ratio target of 122.5% by 2013 (at the end of December 2010, Bank of Ireland, AIB and EBS had ratios of around 170%; IL&P's was 248%). The minister of finance, Michael Noonan, has also indicated that, once reconstituted, Ireland's banks will be much more domestically focused than was the case during their years of unsustainable expansion.
