## Iceland (2004-12-01)

After rebounding strongly in 2003, private consumption has been one of the main drivers of the economy this year, and robust consumer demand is forecast over the outlook period. Household balance sheets should be sustained by rising house prices and positive trends in the equity market, while solid real wage growth and income tax cuts will boost individuals' purchasing power. We expect private consumption to continue to be financed by increased borrowing, particularly given the emergence of broader competition on the domestic loan market. Investment growth has recovered strongly since 2003, in response to a series of public-works programmes and the start of construction work on the Karahnjukar hydropower plant in the east of the country. Business investment is forecast to rise sharply over the outlook period, as a number of large-scale industrial projects gather pace, reaching an expected peak in 2006. Investment growth in other industrial sectors will be sluggish, however, because of residual unused capacity and the crowding-out effects generated by the heavy industrial projects. Exports of goods and services have recovered to some extent this year, and solid growth is forecast over the outlook period, in response to robust foreign demand. However, import growth is projected to accelerate at a much faster rate in 2005-06, reflecting strong demand for investment goods linked to the large-scale industrial projects, as well as the impetus given to imports of consumer goods by vigorous consumer demand. The foreign balance is therefore expected to act as a significant drag on economic growth in both years.The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the ruling centre-right Independence Party (IP) to remain in office over the outlook period as the senior partner in coalition with the centrist Progressive Party (PP). Support for the government-now headed by the PP leader, Halldor Asgrimsson, after the IP leader, David Oddsson, stood down (as agreed) in September after 13 years as prime minister-has recovered in opinion polls over recent months, following its decision to repeal a controversial media bill. Several large-scale, foreign-investment-led projects are forecast to have a significant stimulatory impact on the economy over the outlook period, but there is an increasing risk that these projects could lead to serious overheating in the economy. Following estimated GDP growth of 4.8% in 2004, the economy is forecast to expand by 5% in 2005 and by 4.8% in 2006, driven by strong domestic demand. Annual average inflation is forecast to remain well above the Central Bank of Iceland's target rate of 2.5% in 2005-06. The current-account deficit is projected to widen sharply over the outlook period.On December 7th the Central Bank raised its main intervention rate, the repo rate, by a sizeable 100 basis points to 8.25%-the sixth interest rate hike since May. The Central Bank has reiterated its determination to keep inflation as close to target as possible, and can be expected to continue its cycle of monetary policy tightening well into 2005.With rapid domestic demand growth (underpinned by booming credit growth) forecast to be the main driver of the economy over the outlook period, there is now a significant risk that inflation could rise above the Central Bank's upper tolerance limit of 4% in 2005.The 2005 budget, passed in early December, provided some evidence that the government will continue in its efforts to consolidate the public finances and reduce public debt over the outlook period. It emphasised a degree of fiscal restraint-to be achieved through expenditure cuts and a reduction in public investment-to counter the rapid economic expansion expected over the outlook period (driven mainly by the large-scale, foreign-investment-led projects in eastern Iceland). At the same time, however, the government also presented a proposed programme of tax cuts for 2005-07. Although the largest phase of the tax reform is only projected to take effect from 2007, when the power-intensive investment projects should be approaching completion, a tighter fiscal stance than that envisaged in the budget would nevertheless have been welcome, given the favourable outlook for economic growth and increasing signs of imbalance in the economy, such as the substantial (and rising) current-account deficit, mounting external debt and strong inflationary pressure. The monetary stance of the Central Bank of Iceland will continue to focus on its inflation target, defined as a 2.5% rise in the consumer price index over a 12-month period. There is a strong likelihood that monetary policy will have to shoulder an excessive burden over the next few years, given the proposed tax cuts and the recent restructuring of the domestic mortgage market (which is expected to boost private consumption and inflationary pressure). Although not our central forecast, placing too great an emphasis on raising short-term interest rates could lead to a rapid slowdown in economic activity once the main development phase of the investment projects is completed in late 2006.The Central Bank has independence in setting interest rates to bring the rate of inflation close to its central target of 2.5%. After leaving the main intervention rate, the repo rate, on hold at 5.3% and adopting a broadly neutral monetary policy stance between February 2003 and May 2004, the Central Bank has since raised interest rates on six separate occasions by a total of 295 basis points, taking the repo rate up to 8.25%. The most recent increase, of 100 basis points, occurred on December 7th, with the Central Bank emphasising the need to counteract strong inflationary pressure and surging demand in the housing market (because of the availability of more favourable financing conditions following the entry of commercial banks into the mortgage market). Inflation rose to 3.9% in early December, close to the 4% upper limit of the Central Bank's tolerance band, and with inflationary pressures forecast to remain strong over the outlook period, we expect the cycle of monetary policy tightening to continue in 2005. Our baseline forecast is for the repo rate to rise to around 10% by the end of next year, before falling back slightly in the second half of 2006.Iceland's small economy is dependent on imports of almost all categories of goods, and prices are sensitive to currency fluctuations. From a fairly low base inflation has risen strongly in 2004, reflecting a sharp rise in domestic property prices and persistently high oil prices. After peaking at 3.9% in June, inflation fell back to 3.4% in September, but then picked up again to 3.9% in early December, well above the Central Bank's target rate of 2.5% and close to its upper tolerance limit of 4%. Given our assumption of lower oil prices in 2005, imported price pressures are forecast to weaken next year, with inflation projected to rise only gradually in Iceland's main trading partner countries. However, inflationary pressure in Iceland is forecast to remain robust over the outlook period, sustained by strong domestic demand growth. A tighter labour market, leading to modest wage drift, and the recent restructuring of the domestic mortgage market are likely to present additional upside risks to inflation over the next few years. Overall, average annual inflation is estimated at 3.2% this year, rising to 3.5% in 2005, before falling back slightly to 3.2% in 2006.The world economy faces several risks, especially the unwinding of imbalances in the US economy, which have the potential to turn the forecast deceleration into something more serious. Private-sector debt in the US remains high, and public-sector borrowing has increased rapidly. A loss of confidence among US households could enforce severe private-sector retrenchment at a time when the public sector has exhausted its room to provide extra stimulus. There is a danger that overinvestment in the Chinese economy could result in a severe slowdown.Repeated expenditure overruns contributed to a deterioration of the public finances between 2001 and 2003, when the general government budget deficit reached an estimated 1.6% of GDP. Higher than anticipated unemployment and disability benefit payments, as well as rising hospital costs, have again resulted in strong expenditure growth in 2004, although this is estimated to have been more than offset by a hike in tax revenue as a result of the robust economic expansion. For 2004 as a whole the general government budget deficit is estimated to have narrowed to around 0.1% of GDP (compared with a budgeted surplus of 0.3%). We remain sceptical about the likely success of government efforts to control the growth of current expenditure over the outlook period, but with tax receipts projected to continue to rise sharply in line with further strong domestic demand growth, we expect a considerable improvement in the public finances. The general government budget balance is forecast to record a surplus of 0.9% of GDP in 2005, rising to 1.6% of GDP in 2006.
