## Iceland (2004-06-01)

Despite the current furore in Icelandic politics surrounding the government's controversial media ownership bill, the Economist Intelligence Unit expects the ruling centre-right Independence Party (IP), led by the prime minister, David Oddsson, to continue in office over the outlook period as the senior partner in coalition with the Progressive Party (PP). Mr Oddsson is due to stand down as prime minister in September, when he will be replaced by the PP leader and current foreign affairs minister, Halldor Asgrimsson. Several large-scale, foreign investment-led projects are forecast to have a significant stimulatory impact on the economy over the outlook period and beyond, but there is an increasing risk that these projects could lead to serious overheating in the economy. After rising by an estimated 4% in 2003, real GDP is forecast to expand by 4.4% in 2004 and by 4.9% in 2005, driven by strong domestic demand. Annual average inflation is forecast at 2.7% this year and at 3.1% in 2005, above the Central Bank's target rate of 2.5%. The current-account deficit increased sharply in 2003 and is projected to widen further during the outlook period.On June 1st the Central Bank of Iceland raised its main intervention rate, the repo rate, by 0.25 percentage points to 5.75%-the second interest rate hike in the past month. We expect the Central Bank to continue its cycle of monetary policy tightening in the second half of this year and in 2005.The 2004 budget, passed in December 2003, suggested that the government would continue in its efforts to consolidate the public finances and reduce public debt. It emphasised a degree of fiscal restraint-to be achieved through expenditure cuts and a sharp reduction in public investment-in anticipation of the rapid economic expansion expected over the outlook period, while the decision to adopt a medium-term fiscal programme provided scope for a more credible policy framework. However, government expenditure rose sharply in 2003, and so far there appear to be few signs of this trend being reversed in 2004. With a number of macroeconomic imbalances resurfacing-including a widening current-account deficit and a surge in external debt-fiscal policy has a key role to play to avert any serious overheating of the economy as a result of ongoing major foreign investment-led projects. At present, there is a strong likelihood that monetary policy will have to shoulder an excessive burden over the outlook period, particularly if the government decides to implement its proposed programme of tax cuts-the first phase of which could be introduced in 2005-without adequate expenditure control. The monetary stance of the Central Bank of Iceland will continue to focus on its inflation target, defined as a 2.5% rise in the consumer price index over a 12-month period.The Central Bank has independence in setting interest rates to bring the rate of inflation close to a target of 2.5%. After leaving the main intervention rate, the repo rate, on hold at 5.3% and adopting a broadly neutral monetary policy stance since February 2003, the Central Bank raised interest rates by 20 basis points in early May and by a further 25 basis points at the beginning of June, taking the repo rate to 5.75%. Inflation has picked up strongly over recent months, reaching 3.9% year on year in early June, well above the Central Bank's target rate. We forecast inflationary pressures to remain strong, given the projected rate of expansion of the economy over the outlook period in response to the large-scale investment projects and the government's proposed programme of tax cuts. The Central Bank is therefore expected to continue with its cycle of monetary policy tightening in the second half of the year and throughout 2005. The scale of interest rate hikes will be dependent on exchange-rate developments and the government's fiscal stance, but our baseline forecast is for the repo rate to rise to around 7.8% by the end of the outlook period.Iceland's small economy is dependent on imports of almost all categories of goods, and prices are sensitive to currency fluctuations. Over 2003 as a whole inflation averaged 2.1%. Inflation remained fairly stable in the first quarter of 2004, but has since picked up strongly. In early June inflation stood at 3.9% year on year, up from 1.8% in March and well above the Central Bank's official target rate of 2.5%. The recent rise in energy prices has had some impact, but the main contributory factor has been a sharp increase in house prices (excluding housing costs, inflation stood at 2.7% in early June). With oil prices expected to fall back in the second half of the year, imported price pressures are expected to remain relatively weak, with inflation forecast to rise only slowly in Iceland's main trading partner countries. Inflationary pressure in Iceland is forecast to remain robust over the outlook period, as economic activity, primarily domestic demand, continues to strengthen and labour market tension leads to modest wage drift. Overall, inflation is forecast to average 2.7% this year, rising to 3.1% in 2005.The official trade-weighted exchange-rate index appreciated in 2003, and we expect this trend to be repeated over the next few years during the period of heavy industrial projects. Although downward pressure will be placed on the krona on account of the widening current-account deficit, rising inflationary expectations and the continuing programme of foreign-currency purchases by the Central Bank, we expect the impact on the exchange rate to be more than offset by the substantial inflow of foreign capital related to the large-scale investment projects, a rise in foreign borrowing, and a widening domestic-foreign interest rate differential. After strengthening sharply against the US dollar in 2003, the krona is forecast to continue to appreciate against the US currency over the outlook period. The krona is expected to remain fairly stable against the euro.
