## Latvia (2006-12-01)

The Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank) remains concerned about the rapid growth of lending, which is contributing to demand-side inflationary pressures and economic overheating. In November the BoL raised its refinancing rate by 50 basis points, to 5%. This followed a previous rise by 50 basis points in July-the rate had previously been unchanged since November 2004. However, the BoL is worried that the interest rate differential with the euro zone has encouraged capital flows into Latvia, also contributing to the overheating. Rate rises by the European Central Bank (ECB) have narrowed the differential, giving the BoL some leeway to raise its own rates. The ECB base rate is currently 3.25%, and we expect it to reach 3.5% by the end of 2006, before rising again in 2008. We expect growth of bank lending to begin to slow in 2007, but if lending continues to expand more rapidly than expected, the BoL may raise rates further.The Latvian economy expanded by 12% year on year in the first half of 2006, and we estimate real GDP growth for the whole of 2006 at 10.8%. The economy is running a large positive output gap, and there is a risk that a sharp correction could eventually result if imbalances remain unchecked. However, our baseline forecast is for a more benign slowdown. Economic expansion has been driven by strong domestic demand, which is likely to grow less rapidly in 2007-08. The recent boom has been partly financed by a sharp increase in credit, but interest rate rises in Latvia and in the euro zone should slow the growth of lending in 2007-08. In addition, labour shortages are becoming apparent in sectors such as construction. Investment growth, although still vibrant, is unlikely to match the high rates of growth seen in 2005-06. As a result import growth, which is driven partly by demand for capital goods for investment, will decelerate. Export growth is also likely to slow, as economic expansion slackens in neighbouring economies such as Russia. We therefore forecast that real GDP growth will moderate gradually to 8% in 2007 and 7% in 2008.The Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank) remains concerned about the rapid growth of lending, which is contributing to demand-side inflationary pressures and economic overheating. In November the BoL raised its refinancing rate by 50 basis points, to 5%. This followed a previous rise by 50 basis points in July-the rate had previously been unchanged since November 2004. However, the BoL is worried that the interest rate differential with the euro zone has encouraged capital flows into Latvia, also contributing to the overheating. Rate rises by the European Central Bank (ECB) have narrowed the differential, giving the BoL some leeway to raise its own rates. The ECB base rate is currently 3.25%, and we expect it to reach 3.5% by the end of 2006, before rising again in 2008. We expect growth of bank lending to begin to slow in 2007, but if lending continues to expand more rapidly than expected, the BoL may raise rates further.The Latvian economy expanded by 12% year on year in the first half of 2006, and we estimate real GDP growth for the whole of 2006 at 10.8%. The economy is running a large positive output gap, and there is a risk that a sharp correction could eventually result if imbalances remain unchecked. However, our baseline forecast is for a more benign slowdown. Economic expansion has been driven by strong domestic demand, which is likely to grow less rapidly in 2007-08. The recent boom has been partly financed by a sharp increase in credit, but interest rate rises in Latvia and in the euro zone should slow the growth of lending in 2007-08. In addition, labour shortages are becoming apparent in sectors such as construction. Investment growth, although still vibrant, is unlikely to match the high rates of growth seen in 2005-06. As a result import growth, which is driven partly by demand for capital goods for investment, will decelerate. Export growth is also likely to slow, as economic expansion slackens in neighbouring economies such as Russia. We therefore forecast that real GDP growth will moderate gradually to 8% in 2007 and 7% in 2008.
