## Brazil (2005-08-01)

The monetary policy committee of the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank) held the benchmark Selic overnight interest rate steady at 19.75% in its July meeting. This is in line with our forecast, which anticipates that by the end of the year the Selic rate will have been reduced to 18.5%.According to the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB, the Central Bank), a larger primary surplus and lower interest burden contributed to a reduction in the net public debt/GDP ratio from 58.7% at the end of 2003 to 50.3% at the end of May 2005. We expect the public debt/GDP ratio to fall a little further over the forecast period, but it will remain uncomfortably high, at close to 50%. Any exchange-rate slippage will have a negative effect on the debt stock and debt service, although the vulnerability of the fiscal accounts to exchange-rate fluctuations has been reduced by a halving of the proportion of foreign-currency and exchange-rate-linked domestic debt in the past two years, to around 15% of the total. Between September 2004 and May 2005 the Central Bank increased the Selic rate by 3.75 percentage points to 19.75%, in response to price pressures, in line with its inflation-targeting policy. In the June and July monetary policy committee meetings, the rate was held steady as inflation moderated. With inflation expectations still towards the top end of the official inflation target range for 2005 (the target is 5.1%, with a ceiling of 7%), we expect the Selic rate to return to a downward trend towards the end of the year. This forecast is based on the assumption that the exchange rate will hold firm and price pressures will ease despite the continued high oil prices. The most important risks to this scenario stem from uncertainties in the global economy. Any sharp retraction of global liquidity would quickly be felt in Brazil, with pressure on the exchange rate prompting a new wave of monetary tightening.Strong demand and high oil prices boosted price pressures in 2004, but increases in the Selic rate between September 2004 and May 2005 reinforced a strong commitment to keeping inflationary pressures in check. After ending 2004 at 7.6% (towards the top of the Central Bank's target range of within 2.5 percentage points of 5.5%), we expect inflation to moderate in 2005-06. With the authorities seeking to reinforce confidence in the inflation-targeting framework by meeting the Central Bank's target for 2005 of 5.1% (within a band of 2-7%), monetary policy will respond swiftly to any inflationary shocks or changes in market expectations. We expect that by the end of 2006 this will bring inflation down to close to the target level of 4.5%. (The target range is a two-percentage-point band either side of the central target.) Our forecast assumes that the average oil price will be up by around 30% in 2005 but will begin to moderate in 2006, helping to ease inflationary pressures by then. Any further oil price shocks, or sudden depreciation of the real exchange-rate, could frustrate efforts to meet the target and force renewed monetary tightening. With the labour market still slack in most areas, wage pressures are unlikely to be the cause of any upturn in inflation, although in some sectors there will be trade union pressure for real earnings to be restored to previous levels, following several years of decline.The Economist Intelligence Unit expects macroeconomic policy to remain in line with the medium-term framework agreed with the IMF even though a stand-by arrangement with the Fund, which had been in place since late 2002, was not renewed when it expired in March 2005. Within the framework, demand management plays a subordinate role as fiscal policy is tailored to stabilising the public debt and monetary policy to meeting inflation targets. By continuing to meet the target for the primary fiscal surplus despite strong political pressure to increase spending on social programmes, and by increasing the benchmark Selic overnight rate until inflation began to subside in June, the government has confirmed its cautious stance. Apart from keeping a rein on inflation, this has helped to maintain confidence in the financial markets. We expect some relaxation of policy in the second half of 2005, but this will happen only if market conditions allow.After the exceptionally favourable global economic conditions experienced in 2004, with a policy-induced growth surge in the US coinciding with still-strong expansion in China and an improvement in Japan, the global economy has started to weaken. We expect world GDP growth (on a purchasing power parity basis) to decelerate in 2005-06, as a cycle of monetary tightening brings global interest rates towards more neutral levels and the imbalances in the global economy begin to reach their limits. Many of the world's largest economies have high debt levels, which will dampen growth in the medium term and leave them exposed to a sudden correction if there were to be a precipitous loss of risk appetite, driven by the tightening of global liquidity. Brazil's large financing needs leave it particularly vulnerable on this score, despite the elimination of the current-account deficit. Continuing high oil prices will also depress growth prospects in some important markets and the Chinese economy-currently contributing significantly to global growth-might suffer a sharp slowdown in the forecast period.Robust export growth, high nominal and real interest rates and a strong inter-national appetite for emerging markets has supported the Real since mid-2004. However, the currency is still not overvalued in purchasing power terms, and our forecast anticipates that it will be broadly stable in real terms in the forecast period. Although Brazil is less vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment than in the recent past (owing to the elimination of the current-account deficit and a reduction in exchange-rate-linked domestic public debt), rising international interest rates, an increase in risk aversion, a sharp fall in commodity prices or a downturn in Brazil's main export markets would have a negative impact on the real exchange rate and cause episodes of volatility. A combination of these pressures could produce a severe exchange-rate shock.Having reached a record US$33.7bn (with export earnings up by 32% and import spending by 30%) owing to strong global economic growth and successful export promotion efforts in 2004, Brazil's trade surplus held up strongly in the first half of 2005. We expect that export growth will decelerate in the coming months, and that the trade surplus will narrow from US$40bn in 2005 to around US$35bn in 2006. This, together with widening services and income deficits, will shrink the current-account surplus from 2.4% of GDP in 2005 to 1.6% in 2006. Despite this surplus, the substantial external financing required for repayments on the large stock of external debt (at almost US$40bn on medium- and long-term debt and around US$20bn of short-term debt), leaves Brazil exposed to financing risk in the event of a seizure of international capital markets. We expect the total debt stock to fall slightly from its current level; this, combined with annual GDP growth of over 3% and a stable exchange rate, would bring the year-end total debt/GDP ratio down from an estimated 36% in 2004 to 27% in 2006-a major improvement on the ratio for 2002, which peaked at close to 50%. Our forecast anticipates foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows of around US$17bn a year in 2005-06.Following a strong upturn in 2004, with GDP growth of 4.9%, we expect further, but less robust, growth in 2005 and 2006. In the first quarter of 2005, quarter-on-quarter GDP growth was down to 0.3%, bringing year-on-year growth to 2.9%, down from 4.9% in the fourth quarter of 2004. The slowdown reflects the impact of rising real interest rates on domestic private-sector demand, and although export growth remains strong the appreciation of the exchange rate will have dampened the net external stimulus. We expect both consumer spending and investment spending to respond to an easing of real lending rates by the end of 2005, but the uncertainty arising from elections and weakening external demand will inhibit investment growth in 2006. The net contribution of the external sector, which has led growth in 2002-04, will become weaker as a result of a stronger exchange rate and softer external demand growth.
