## Latvia (2006-03-01)

The Bank of Latvia (BoL, the central bank) has little room for independent monetary policy, as Latvia's currency, the lat, is pegged to the euro within the EU's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM2). We do not expect the BoL to change its refinancing rate (currently at 4%) in 2006. On the one hand, economic overheating in Latvia would appear to justify higher interest rates. On the other hand, the BoL is concerned that the interest rate differential with the euro area has probably encouraged capital flows into Latvia, contributing to overheating. However, the European Central Bank (ECB) raised its interest rates by 25 basis points in December 2005, and we expect it to increase its rates further over the forecast period, which will reduce the interest rate differential. Meanwhile, the BoL has tried to curb the current lending boom by raising the mandatory reserve requirements for banks from 4% to 8% in 2005, in two steps. Further increases seem unlikely, as Latvian customers could be served from other EU countries if the costs of banking in Latvia become excessive.Latvia will remain an attractive destination for capital flows, even if its entry into the euro zone is delayed slightly, and we do not expect it to have any difficulty in financing its current-account deficits. The relative share of foreign direct investment (FDI) in capital flows will decline (FDI inflows are mostly in the form of reinvested profits). However, the importance of foreign borrowing by Latvian banks will increase. Almost all of the leading Latvian banks are owned by large west European banks, so that their creditworthiness will remain high.The Latvian economy continued to grow rapidly in the third quarter of 2005, expanding by 11.4% year on year, yielding growth of 10.1% for the first three quarters. Growth was broad-based, and we estimate full-year real GDP growth of 9.8%. Domestic demand growth is likely to weaken in 2006-07. The recent boom in domestic demand has been partly financed by a rapid increase in credit, but the willingness of companies and households to borrow seems to be diminishing. In addition, bottlenecks are becoming apparent in the labour market and the construction sector. Investment growth, although still strong, will not match the high rate seen in 2005, which was boosted by a sharp increase in EU funding in Latvia's first full year of EU membership. Export growth is likely to slow from the extremely high rate recorded in 2005, as economic expansion slackens in neighbouring economies such as Russia, and as demand in EU export markets remains weak. We therefore forecast a slowdown in GDP growth to 7.7% in 2006 and 7% in 2007. Although higher forecast oil prices pose a downside risk to growth forecasts, the strength of demand at present tends to weigh in the opposite direction.
